April 2024
NOTE

This action plan focuses on the green hydrogen industry, its derivatives, and the entire
value chain.

The document is structured into six sections. The first section presents the words of the
Minister of Energy, Diego Pardow, regarding the scope of the Green Hydrogen Action
Plan. The second section provides a selection of the most relevant milestones and a
detailed list of the objectives to be achieved, organised into two time windows.

In the third section, the reasons for promoting the development of the green hydrogen
industry in Chile are outlined. Its fundamental role in achieving the goal of carbon
neutrality by 2050 is highlighted, as well as the opportunities it offers for the sustainable
development of the country.

The fourth section presents the process of drafting the plan, including the participative
strategy in five instances and the methodology used for developing the proposed actions.

The fifth section contains the strategic guidelines that have shaped the definition of plan
actions. This includes target images of what the country aims to achieve through the
green hydrogen industry, the sustainability criteria used to build the proposal, and a
governance structure that will serve as a vehicle for achieving the established objectives.

This Plan's backbone lies in section six, titled "lines of action." For each line of action, the
objective explaining the grouping of actions is described, and a Gantt chart is presented
as a prologue to understanding the actions, their relationships, and milestones. The
colours of the horizontal bars indicate the common scope (if any) between different
actions. Moreover, connectors representing the relationship between actions are
presented. If the connector has a single direction, it indicates input-output, and if it has
double direction, it indicates mutual feedback. Milestones representing significant
activities that give tangibility to the implementation of actions are also included. In
milestones where a dotted line appears, it indicates processes or actions that repeat year
after year, such as annual reports or critical updates.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
 NOTE ................................................................................................... 3
 MESSAGE FROM THE MINISTER OF ENERGY ............... 7
 KEY MILESTONES ..................................................................... 11
 2.1 TIME WINDOWS ........................................................................ 13

 A WINDOW OF OPPORTUNITY FOR CHILE .................. 15
 3.1 WHY GREEN HYDROGEN? ......................................................... 16
 3.2 SUSTAINABLE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY ............................... 23
 3.3 POLICY, STRATEGY, AND ACTION PLAN ..................................... 25

 PLAN CONSTRUCTION PROCESS ..................................... 28
 4.1 PARTICIPATORY STRATEGY ........................................................ 30
 4.2 METHODOLOGY FOR DEVELOPING THE PLAN .......................... 34
 4.3 MONITORING AND TRACKING................................................... 37

 STRATEGIC GUIDELINES OF THE PLAN ....................... 38
 5.1 AGREED TARGET IMAGES .......................................................... 39
 5.2 SUSTAINABILITY CRITERIA FOR INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT ....... 40
 5.3 GOVERNANCE STRUCTURE........................................................ 46

 LINES OF ACTION .................................................................... 55
 6.1 GOVERNANCE AND MULTI-STAKEHOLDER PARTICIPATION...... 56
 6.2 INFORMATION, DISSEMINATION, AND CIVIC EDUCATION ....... 67
 6.3 MECHANISMS FOR ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL SUPPORT FOR
 THE INDUSTRY .................................................................................... 74
 6.4 ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT ............................................ 92
 6.5 INDUSTRY SUSTAINABILITY ....................................................... 99
 6.6 REGULATORY ENABLEMENT ................................................... 106
 6.7 PERMITTING SYSTEM .............................................................. 111
 6.8 COMPATIBILITY AND TERRITORIAL INTEGRATION FOR PROJECTS
         ……………………………………………………………………………………………...120
6.9 DEVELOPMENT OF ENABLING INFRASTRUCTURE ................... 130
6.10 DEMOGRAPHIC CHALLENGE OF THE ENERGY TRANSITION .. 140
6.11 ELECTRICITY TRANSMISSION AND ENERGY COSTS ................ 145
6.12 USES FOR DECARBONISING THE NATIONAL ECONOMY ........153
6.13 DEMONSTRATIVE PROJECTS ................................................. 162
6.14 BOOSTING PRODUCTIVE LINKAGES ...................................... 166
6.15 STRENGTHENING AND DEVELOPMENT OF HUMAN CAPITAL
         ……………………………………………………………………………………………171
6.16 GENDER PERSPECTIVE IN THE INDUSTRY .............................. 179
6.17 BOOSTING RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, AND INNOVATION 187
6.18 OPENING OF INTERNATIONAL MARKETS .............................. 195

ANNEXES ..................................................................................... 205
MESSAGE FROM
THE MINISTER OF
ENERGY
    Chile has great opportunities to leap towards a more diverse, productive,
    and innovative economy that drives the country forward, generates
    quality jobs, and puts us at the forefront of key industries for a more
    sustainable future for the planet.

    President Gabriel Boric has been clear. We have an immensely powerful
    triad: copper, lithium, and green hydrogen. With green hydrogen, we
    have a unique opportunity to innovate, to provide the necessary
    incentives, and thus prepare ourselves and facilitate the creation of an
    industry for the future.

    In this journey, the green hydrogen industry will contribute to the
    productive reconversion of those communities that have coexisted with
    polluting industries. Therefore, industry development will be with and for
    communities, progressively transitioning from fossil fuels to clean fuels
    like green hydrogen. Investment, more jobs, local development, but
    above all, coherent with our State policy towards a carbon-neutral
    country.

    To achieve the deployment of the industry and the challenges it presents,
    agreements that transcend time are required, providing the necessary
    certainty for the industry, materialising through State policies. Today, we
    have a consensual and long-term energy vision reflected in our National
    Energy Policy and the National Green Hydrogen Strategy, which defined
    the first guidelines for boosting this industry in the country and
    established ambitious medium and long-term goals.

    But to materialise the deployment of a sustainable green hydrogen
    industry in our country, we needed to complement the National Strategy.
    That's why, as a government, we worked on the construction of this
    Action Plan that focuses on and prioritises measures to be developed in
    this decade. With this document, we seek to maintain the tradition of
    consensus policies in energy matters, but with a pragmatic focus on
    concrete actions for all stakeholders.
The Green Hydrogen Action Plan underwent an intense participation
process through various instances. Twenty-two face-to-face and online
civic hearings and workshops were held in all regions of the country,
attended by more than a thousand people, industry representatives, and
civil society organisations. Additionally, the document received around
1,900 comments and observations during the Public Consultation
process.

In parallel, other instances were held such as Interministerial Meetings
that were the focus of technical work on the Action Plan, a Consultative
Council, and a Strategic Committee, consisting of ten women and men,
including former President Michelle Bachelet and former Energy Minister
Juan Carlos Jobet, among other figures from the academic and political
world. This allowed the instrument to be endowed with a cross-sectional
perspective that transcends different governments and prioritises the
country's best interests.

The 81 actions contained in this Plan are aimed at responding to different
lines of work: (1) governance and multi-stakeholder participation; (2)
information, dissemination, and civic education; (3) mechanisms for
economic and financial support for the industry; (4) environmental
management; (5) industry sustainability; (6) regulatory enablement; (7)
permitting system; (8) compatibility and territorial integration of projects;
(9) enabling infrastructure development; (10) demographic challenge of
energy transition; (11) electricity transmission and energy costs; (12) uses
for decarbonising the economy; (13) demonstrative projects; (14)
promotion of productive linkages; (15) strengthening and development
of human capital; (16) gender perspective in the industry; (17) promotion
of research, development, and innovation; and (18) opening to
international markets.

As you know, our country possesses unique comparative advantages.
Firstly, there's our natural environment. The winds in southern Chile and
solar radiation in the Atacama Desert surpass those of anywhere else in
the world, providing ideal conditions for energy generation through wind
and solar plants that cannot be replicated elsewhere.

The second advantage Chile has is a long-term institutional commitment
to climate change that allows the entire country to push for the
deployment of this industry, respecting the environment and in
coordination with local communities.
These two advantages, and thinking about our future competitors, are
essential for Chile to become a world leader in the production of this
clean fuel. Other countries like the United States and Australia have
begun to show their strategies, and in that sense, Chile's bet is a safe,
institutional path anchored in the rules governing international trade.

In the past year, the first projects have been deployed, which are a sample
of the diversity and development possibilities that this industry can offer
to our country. We have a blending project in Coquimbo where green
hydrogen is being delivered to some homes through the natural gas
network, allowing this technology to be brought closer to people. In the
Metropolitan Region, there is a logistics centre that uses green hydrogen
in forklifts, thus reducing operation times.

This nascent industry has also allowed certain tasks to be reoriented, as
in Magallanes, where the synthetic fuel production plant from green
hydrogen has required testing to adapt to these new energy sources. The
above is just a sample of the potential that this industry has for Chile.

This Green Hydrogen Action Plan offers a common, clear, and concrete
path to take advantage of the unique opportunity our country has. The
roadmap we are presenting will allow us to create the enabling conditions
that will drive the creation of this new industry, the generation of quality
jobs, the development of productive linkages in the regions of the
country, and progress in innovation and technological development,
contributing to the economic and social development of Chile and its
inhabitants, and at the same time, making a substantial contribution to
the fight against the climate crisis.




Diego Pardow Lorenzo
Minister of Energy
KEY MILESTONES

 The ten milestones listed below are highlighted for
 their role in enabling the industry. Their
 implementation will be realised in the first time
 window of this Action Plan.

              •    Installation of electrolyser equipment in technical-professional
                   high schools for practical teaching of the electrolysis process and
                   other components of the green hydrogen value chain, starting in
                   the Magallanes Region and then in the Antofagasta and Biobío
                   regions.


              •    Formal opening of the GH2 Financial Facility instrument in 2024
                   and commencement of work with projects for financing from 2025
                   onwards.


              •    Closure of the first process of allocation of "Ventana al Futuro"
                   (Window to the Future) state-owned lands, realising projects
                   mainly in the Antofagasta Region. Additionally, a second
                   allocation process will begin.


              •    Awarding of the tender for the reinforcement of the Mardones
                   Pier, in the Magallanes Region, to increase its logistical capacities
                   for the landing of equipment and inputs necessary for the
                   industry.


              •    Strengthening of the R&D Law, tripling its upper threshold of tax
                   credit, through the Income Tax Reform Law.


              •    Publication   of   Public   Environmental    Baselines   facilitating
                   environmental assessment processes and standardising available
                   information, starting in the Magallanes Region and subsequently
                   in the Antofagasta Region.




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                     page 11
                    •    Publication of the first version of the green hydrogen information
                         and consultation platform, to facilitate the delivery of information
                         regarding the industry, in line with the access to information
                         standards of the Escazú Agreement.


                    •    Launch of the "Magallanes Technological Development Centre"
                         (to be tendered) and the "Technological Development Centre for
                         the Maritime and Naval Industry" (Chilean Navy), to strengthen
                         the   development     and   management      of   green   hydrogen
                         technological innovation.


                    •    Start-up of the green hydrogen plant in Cabo Negro in the
                         Magallanes Region, which will allow hydrogen to be injected into
                         the ENAP industrial complex gas networks, promoting hydrogen
                         consumption, and supporting decarbonisation.


                    •    Publication of feasibility results for the transportation of copper
                         and sulphuric acid to materialise the first green commercial
                         maritime route in Latin America before 2030, prioritising the
                         Antofagasta Region and other industrial zones of the country.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                        page 12
 2.1 TIME WINDOWS


                  Green hydrogen and its derivatives can play a role far beyond our
                  commitments to carbon neutrality and energy security needs. It offers
                  a unique opportunity for the sustainable transformation of our
                  energy and industrial systems, contributing to national economic
                  growth, local development with high environmental standards, and
                  positioning itself as a sector that sets an example for other industries.

                  The Action Plan is envisaged for green hydrogen, its derivatives, and
                  the entire value chain. Therefore, the proposed actions are varied in
                  both scope and theme and competence. For example, some depend
                  on a single public service while others require coordinated
                  interministerial work; many of them are designed to be implemented
                  in a concatenated and logical manner; some are specific in nature,
                  while others are cross-cutting.

                  As a result of the Action Plan development process, these measures
                  have been arranged into 18 lines of action to advance the
                  establishment of certain necessary conditions for the development of
                  green hydrogen and derivatives.


                  The first implementation time window (2023-2026) is designed to
                  achieve the appropriate investment signals, rules, and necessary
                  regulations (with a strong focus on trends towards ammonia) and to
                  strengthen relationships with potential buyers. The second time
                  window (2026-2030) is designed to begin to materialise productive
                  development and decarbonisation with an emphasis on regional and
                  local development. In this context, Figure 1 shows these conditions
                  to be achieved based on the measures.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                       page 13
FIGURE 1: TIME WINDOWS FOR ACTION IN THIS DECADE




               Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan   page 14
 3.1 WHY GREEN HYDROGEN?


                    Currently, Chile faces significant challenges in decarbonising its energy
                    matrix, as our sector is still highly dependent on fossil fuels: 64% of final
                    energy consumption comes from fossil sources1, not including fossil fuels
                    used for electricity generation, and this sector is responsible for 76%2 of
                    the country's total greenhouse gas emissions (28% from thermal power
                    generation, 25% from transportation, 15% from industry, 7% from
                    building consumption, 1% from fugitive emissions).

                    Additionally, our country imports nearly 98% of the fossil fuels we use,
                    leaving us in a vulnerable position, both in terms of supply security and
                    fluctuating international fuel prices.

                    Despite this, Chile has the conditions to address challenges related to
                    emissions and supply vulnerability, especially due to our enormous
                    potential for renewable energies. While hydroelectricity has always been
                    present in our electrical matrix, the last decade has seen a significant
                    increase in the participation of other renewable energies. Before 2015,
                    the country had 720 MW of installed capacity in wind energy and 225
                    MW in solar energy, and to date, the figures reach 4,509 MW and 8,938
                    MW, respectively3. This contribution could continue to increase in the
                    future, as our estimated potential for renewable energy development
                    reaches 2,315 GW4, 70 times the currently installed electrical capacity.




       1   National Energy Balance 2022. Ministry of Energy.

       25th Biennial Update Report to the United Nations Framework Convention
       on Climate Change.

       3Installed Generation Capacity Statistics, National Energy Commission
       (CNE from its acronym in Spanish).

       4Identification and Quantification of Renewable Energy Potentials 2021,
       Ministry of Energy. 1 GW = 1,000 MW.



Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                            page 16
                  In light of this scenario and in order to meet climate challenges, in 2019,
                  in preparation for COP 25, we started working to define a cost-effective
                  pathway to carbon neutrality by 2050, which was reflected in the Paris
                  Agreement. The pathway identified, as a first effort, the incorporation of
                  more renewable energies into the electrical system to reduce its
                  emissions factor. However, we must make substantial progress in
                  decarbonising and electrifying other energy consumption, as currently
                  only 22% of our country's final energy use is supplied by electricity.

                  Projections in the Long-Term Energy Planning (PELP from its acronym in
                  Spanish) 2022-2060 show that direct electrification could increase to over
                  50% of final consumption. The challenge remains to decarbonise the
                  remaining 50%, which involves energy consumption that is difficult to
                  electrify, such as those associated with high-tonnage transport,
                  interregional buses, household natural gas use, among others.

                  The response to this challenge is electrification and indirect
                  decarbonisation through an energy vector, such as green hydrogen or
                  synthetic fuels derived from it. In this way, the major actions to achieve
                  carbon neutrality are:


                      1. Promoting energy efficiency (contributing 35% of the emissions
                           reduction necessary to achieve carbon neutrality).

                      2. Increasing the contribution of renewable energies to the
                           electrical system (contributing 24%).

                      3. Promoting electromobility (contributing 18%).

                      4. Developing green hydrogen and derivatives, primarily in mining
                           and freight transport applications (contributing 24%).

                  In parallel, and reinforcing the path that was being outlined, in 2019, as
                  the State of Chile, we signed an agreement with the owners of coal-fired
                  power plants for their decommission by 2040,




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                         page 17
                 or their retrofit, and the commitment to not install new plants in the
                 country.

                 Likewise, this commitment to Energy Transition is established in various
                 public policy instruments. In 2019, we published the Long-Term Climate
                 Strategy (ECLP from its acronym in Spanish) which establishes a route to
                 emissions neutrality, where one of the goals is to ensure that at least 20%
                 of the fuel matrix is constituted by green hydrogen or derivatives.
                 Additionally, for the first time in the country, in 2022, we established a
                 binding climate commitment through the enactment of the Climate
                 Change Framework Law and its carbon neutrality target by 2050.

                 Also in 2022, we updated the National Energy Policy considering the
                 significant changes that had occurred in the country and the world since
                 the first version in 2015. The commitments of this update of the Policy
                 are focused on accompanying the transition process towards 2050.

                 In this context, green hydrogen opens up a great opportunity for Chile,
                 as we have comparative advantages in renewable energy availability for
                 its production and regulatory conditions that favour foreign investment.
                 We have the opportunity to position ourselves as a producing and
                 exporting country of this energy, which also contributes to the
                 sustainable growth of our local economy, improving the quality of life of
                 citizens, safeguarding harmonious territorial location, and adhering to
                 climate and environmental commitments established by our country.




      3.1.1 Historical Energy
      Mix up to 2022



                 Currently, Chile has a highly fossil fuel-dependent energy consumption,
                 mostly imported. The latest National Energy Balance, based on 2022 data,
                 indicates that:




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                       page 18
                                       •    64% of the energy used in the country was supplied by fossil
                                            sources, such as diesel, gasoline, natural gas, among others. Of
                                            these, 98% is imported from other countries.


                                       •    14% of the energy corresponds to biomass.


                                       •    22% of the total energy was supplied by electricity. Of this, 55%
                                            came from renewable sources.

                                  From the above, it is possible to affirm that only 22% of the final energy
                                  consumption was supplied by renewable and clean sources in the
                                  country. Of the remaining 78%, a large part came from fossil sources
                                  imported from other countries.

                                  Chile today faces the great challenge of decarbonising its entire energy
                                  matrix, and in this, the electrification of consumption with a clean
                                  electrical system and the use of green hydrogen and its derivatives are
                                  essential for this task, which will also provide a level of autonomy and
                                  energy sovereignty crucial for future challenges.




FIGURE 2: FINAL ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN CHILE, 2022. NATIONAL ENERGY BALANCE: 327,696 TCAL




                 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                        page 19
      3.1.2 Projected Energy
      Mix up to 2050

                 According to the energy projections of the Long-Term Energy Planning
                 (PELP) developed by the Ministry of Energy, by the year 2050, the
                 country's energy consumption will undergo a substantial transformation
                 in its composition. The most significant change is the reduction in fossil
                 fuel consumption, driven mainly by increased electrification of
                 consumption, shifting from 22% to a range between 42% and 46% by
                 2050 (depending on the scenario), and the incorporation of green
                 hydrogen and its derivatives, accounting for a range between 16% and
                 17% of national energy consumption.

                 Fossil fuels will decrease their share from 64% in 2022 to a range between
                 31% and 36% by 2050, allowing Chile to depend less and less on mostly
                 imported fuels. This will develop an industry in the country that will do
                 just the opposite: use ports and the productive infrastructure associated
                 originally with that importation to export clean fuels to the world, such
                 as green hydrogen, green ammonia, green methanol, among others. The
                 opportunity is crucial for restructuring productive activity in Chile,
                 maintaining, and improving the jobs associated today with an inherently
                 polluting industry, to transition to a clean industry that must be
                 developed     harmoniously       with   the   environment,   territory,   and
                 communities.

                 Below, the final energy consumption projected in the country by the year
                 2050 is presented for two of the scenarios of the Long-Term Energy
                 Planning (PELP): Carbon Neutrality and Accelerated Transition.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                         page 20
FIGURE   3: FINAL ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN CHILE, 2050. PELP: CARBON NEUTRALITY SCENARIO: 349,959 TCAL




                     Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan              page 21
FIGURE 4: FINAL ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN CHILE, 2050. PELP: CARBON NEUTRALITY SCENARIO: 349,959 TCAL




                 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan            page 22
 3.2 SUSTAINABLE
 INTERNATIONAL
 ECONOMY

                 Green hydrogen and its derivatives will play a substantial role in
                 decarbonising the national economy to achieve the goal of becoming a
                 carbon-neutral and resilient country by 2050, thus complying with the
                 Climate Change Framework Law.

                 Furthermore, it presents another opportunity associated with the
                 country's productive reconversion, as explained in the previous section.
                 It will allow us to shift from importing polluting fossil fuels to exporting
                 clean fuels to the world, while maintaining and improving productive
                 activities in different territories, such as employment and local
                 development, thus enabling a new productive identity for Chile.

                 The hydrogen industry also encompasses a value chain that, as a whole,
                 involves a significant number of individual productive activities.
                 Therefore, it requires substantial investments for its competitive
                 production globally, with economies of scale being one of the main
                 criteria to achieve this goal.

                 As indicated in the National Green Hydrogen Strategy, Chile will be one
                 of the main producers of green hydrogen and its derivatives. This will
                 allow us to decarbonise our productive matrix, but also to export clean
                 fuels to the world and provide the country with an economic activity
                 suitable for the challenges of this century, based on the pillars of the
                 mentioned Strategy:


                      •    Mission-oriented policy


                      •    Efficient pathway to a net-zero country


                      •    Balanced use of resources and land


                      •    Green hydrogen as a catalyst for local growth




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                        page 23
                       •   New economy based on clean exports.


                  Openness to the world the world recognises Chile's potential to be a
                  leader in the production of clean energies, considering its unbeatable
                  conditions in renewable energies and as a country with State policies in
                  the energy sector, developed with consensus among different actors and
                  stable over time.

                  Thus, various publications highlight the country's global competitive
                  position in this regard, for example:


                       •   Latin America Energy Outlook 20235, by the International
                           Energy Agency.


                       •   International Trade and Green Hydrogen 20236, by the
                           International Renewable Energy Agency, IRENA.




       5https://www.iea.org/reports/latin-america-energy-outlook-2023
       6https://www.irena.org/Publications/2023/Dec/International-trade-and-
       green- hydrogen-Supporting-the-global-transition-to-a-low-carbon-
       economy




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                      page 24
 3.3 POLICY, STRATEGY,
 AND ACTION PLAN

                 In light of the emergence of renewable energies in the early 2010s and
                 the need to outline strategic guidelines to better leverage this trend in
                 our country, the first National Energy Policy to 2050 was published in
                 2015. This policy was built through a deep and extensive participatory
                 process, pioneering for its time, based on the search for consensus
                 among sector stakeholders. Additionally, it is considered the first long-
                 term vision State policy, under which the sector's main actions are
                 subscribed.

                 Given the significant changes experienced in Chile and the world since
                 2015 regarding energy transition, it was decided to update the framework
                 of broad consensus provided by the Energy Policy to continue being a
                 useful guide for sector action. At the beginning of 2022, we published the
                 first update of the Policy, again developed through a participatory
                 process. The new document focuses on accompanying the transition
                 process towards the carbon neutrality goal by 2050 and reaffirms
                 commitments related to decontamination, the contribution of energy to
                 the country's productive identity, quality of life, energy system security,
                 and the way to make public policies based on information and
                 participation.

                 The updated Policy establishes 66 goals, among which the following
                 stand out: (1) 100% zero-emission energy in the electricity sector by 2050;
                 (2) at least 80% renewable energy in the electricity sector by 2030; (3) 2
                 GW of storage projects in the electricity sector by 2030; (4) 70% zero-
                 emission fuels in non-electrical end-use energy by 2050; (5) Chile is an
                 exporter of energy in the form of green hydrogen, electricity, or other
                 energy sources by 2030. Goals 1 and 4 promote the replacement of fossil
                 fuels with clean fuels in the energy sector, including green hydrogen and
                 its derivatives as synthetic fuels.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                       page 25
           Addressing this great challenge regarding green hydrogen and its
           derivatives and the opportunity it could bring to Chile, we launched the
           National Green Hydrogen Strategy7 at the end of 2020, defining the first
           guidelines for boosting this industry in the country, establishing ambitious
           medium- and long-term goals. The Strategy is based on six pillars to drive
           this new sustainable green hydrogen and derivatives industry,
           establishing a first action plan for the period 2020-2023 that preliminarily
           pushes these goals and connects with the present Action Plan for the
           period 2023-2030.

           Both the Energy Policy and the National Green Hydrogen Strategy
           provide a strategic framework and instil the ambition that is driving the
           creation of the green hydrogen industry in our country. To materialise
           them, it is necessary to have an Action Plan that focuses on and prioritises
           the actions and measures that must be developed in this decade to
           ensure the sustainable deployment of green hydrogen, enabling us to
           meet the decarbonisation objectives of our economy, open international
           trade opportunities, and foster the country's growth around a new
           sustainable industry for the following decades.

           In this way, the Green Hydrogen Action Plan is directly related to other
           public policy instruments that, together, allow us to outline a clear path
           for the energy transition process, such as the Decarbonisation Plan, to be
           launched during the third quarter of 2024, and the Adaptation and
           Mitigation Plans for Climate Change currently being developed within the
           framework of the Climate Change Framework Law.

           The following sections present the process of building the Action Plan,
           which contains key actions to deploy the green hydrogen industry and its
           derivatives, taking advantage of the current window of opportunity.




7 https://energia.gob.cl/sites/default/files/estrategia_nacional_de_hidrogeno_verde_-_chile.pdf




                                                                   page 26
Main Objective:
             The Green Hydrogen Action Plan sets out a roadmap between 2023 and
             2030 to deploy a sustainable green hydrogen industry, its derivatives, and
             the entire value chain, through coordinated actions among government
             ministries and related agencies, in line with regional and local initiatives.




Specific Objectives of the Plan Development Process:


         •     Ensure the incorporation of sustainability dimensions through an
               "Integrated Sustainability      Analysis"   in the plan development
               methodology.


         •     Organise the actions of State agencies that have an impact on the
               development of the GH2 industry (developed, under development, or
               scheduled).


         •     Prioritise actions that require continuity to implement the plan.


         •     Identify new actions necessary for the deployment of this industry.


         •     Define roles and responsibilities in State agencies with competence to
               facilitate the programming and financing of their actions.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                     page 29
                     4.1
                     PARTICIPATORY
                     STRATEGY
                                      The Green Hydrogen Action Plan was developed through a participatory
                                      process that included five levels: (1) Interministerial Working Groups; (2)
                                      Civic Workshops; (3) Green Hydrogen Advisory Council; (4) Strategic
                                      Committee; (5) Public Consultation.




FIGURE   6: PARTICIPATIVE STRATEGY FRAMEWORK




                    Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                        page 30
                  Additionally,   we      received   support     from    Non-Governmental
                 Organisations (NGOs) in the process of developing the sustainability
                 analysis, through working sessions, surveys, and concrete contributions
                 in the form of proposed measures.

                 Below are the functions of each of the instances.


         I.    Interministerial Working Groups
                  These working groups served as coordination bodies for the
                 development of the Green Hydrogen Action Plan, coordinating the
                 design of plan initiatives, providing themes and discussion inputs to other
                 participation bodies, and incorporating the results from these instances.
                 The working groups were significant in identifying critical issues,
                 proposing preliminary initiatives, and measures associated with each line
                 of action of the Plan.

                  Initially, the work of the groups was structured into three interministerial
                 working groups led by the Ministry of Energy and composed of
                 representatives from various public services according to each theme: (1)
                 Investments and Institutional Framework, (2) Sustainability and Local
                 Value, and (3) Infrastructure and Territorial Organisation.

                  At the end of the process, joint work was conducted with all three groups
                 to give coherence to the proposed measures. Additionally, a cross-
                 sectoral gender working group was formed, which worked iteratively with
                 the other groups, where concrete measures present in the different lines
                 of action of the Plan were identified.


         II.   Civic Workshops
                  These workshops aimed to gather the vision of civil society organisations,
                 the public sector, academia, private sector, Indigenous people, and
                 citizens in general on the development of the green hydrogen industry.
                 The participatory process was carried out in two rounds in Antofagasta,
                 Valparaíso, Metropolitan, Biobío, and Magallanes, along with two remote
                 instances nationwide, with a participation of 1,147 people (34% private
                 sector, 28% public sector, 20% civil society, and 18% academia).

                  In the first workshop, introductory information on the development of
                 green hydrogen in Chile was presented, addressing its main




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                         page 31
                  concepts,     following   which   perceptions     regarding   opportunities,
                  uncertainties, and risks of the green hydrogen industry were discussed in
                  working groups. The output of this first workshop was used to define
                  critical issues.

                  In the second workshop, the identified and systematised critical issues
                  were addressed, proposing and prioritising initiatives to address them in
                  a timeline for the short, medium, and long term. The output of this
                  second workshop was used to define preliminary initiatives.


         III.   Advisory Council
                  This entity was created under the "CORFO Committee for the
                  Development of the Green Hydrogen Industry" with the aim of providing
                  technical advice. In the framework of the Action Plan, the Advisory
                  Council collaborated in refining the critical issues and preliminary
                  initiatives worked on in civic workshops and intersectoral working
                  groups. The Advisory Council met four times during the development of
                  the Action Plan, between April and August 2023.


         IV.    Strategic Committee
                  The purpose of this committee is to provide strategic and policy
                  guidance, with broad consensus among participants, to establish a high-
                  level framework for the Green Hydrogen Action Plan and to build a
                  political narrative that communicates, at the national and international
                  levels, the guidelines of this new industry. For this purpose, work was
                  carried out on the development of "target images" associated with five
                  dimensions: Environmental; International; Economic; Human Capital and
                  Technological Development; Public Engagement. These dimensions
                  reflect the desirable boundaries to promote the green hydrogen industry
                  and its derivatives.

                  The    Strategic   Committee      is   composed    of   ten   cross-sectoral
                  representatives from the political and civil society realms, which allows
                  the instrument to have a cross-cutting perspective, ensuring its relevance
                  beyond the implementation period of the Action Plan 2023-2030.

                  The members of the Strategic Committee are the former president,
                  Michelle Bachelet; former Minister of Energy, Juan Carlos Jobet; regional
                  governor of Antofagasta, Ricardo Díaz; regional governor of Magallanes
                  and Chilean Antarctica, Jorge Flies; dean at the Universidad de Chile,




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                           page 32
                  Rosa Devés; former Minister of Public Works and Mining, Hernán de
                  Solminihac; director at the Universidad de Concepción in Santiago,
                  Marcela Angulo; researcher and academic from the Universidad de
                  Antofagasta, Cristina Dorador; executive director of Libertad y Desarrollo,
                  Bettina Horst; and researcher and coordinator of the Energy Poverty
                  Network, Anahí Urquiza.

                  The Strategic Committee met on six occasions between July and
                  November 2023 and officially delivered its strategic guidance to the
                  Minister of Energy in December 2023.


         V.    Public Consultation
                  From December 22nd, 2023, to February 13th, 2024, the draft of the Action
                  Plan was subjected to public consultation to gather the opinion of
                  citizens regarding the proposal.

                  Around 120 participation forms were received during the consultation,
                  considering about 1900 suggestions and observations (46% private
                  sector, 40% civil society, 9% academia, and 5% public sector).

                  Based on the received feedback, a new structure of the Plan is presented,
                  considering a new grouping of actions to facilitate the monitoring and
                  follow-up process of the included actions.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                        page 33
                    4.2 PLAN DEVELOPMENT
                    METHODOLOGY

                                     The different participation instances served as inputs to develop a series
                                     of intermediate products that establish bases for defining lines of action
                                     and measures of the Action Plan, referring to three areas: (1) context and
                                     strategic focus (green circle); (2) lines of action and evaluation (blue
                                     circle); and (3) monitoring and follow-up (yellow circle).




FIGURE   7: FRAMEWORK OF AREAS, PRODUCTS, AND COMPONENTS OF THE PLAN




                   Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                         page 34
       4.2.1 Context and Strategic
       Focus

                  The first area includes intermediate products and components that serve
                  as the strategic framework of the Action Plan, allowing focus on critical
                  or essential issues.

                  As a starting point, concerns, challenges, and opportunities of the
                  development of the hydrogen industry and its derivatives were identified
                  through participatory and technical means8, which were consolidated
                  into 51 critical issues, summarising those relevant or essential topics to
                  consider in the Action Plan.

                  Additionally, a strategic framework of sustainable development policies
                  and instruments was constructed to frame the proposal of the Action
                  Plan. This framework, along with the 51 identified critical issues, formed
                  the basis for defining sustainability criteria, rules, or conditions to
                  evaluate the relevance and sustainability of the proposed lines of action,
                  presented to the Strategic Committee.

                  Finally, target images agreed upon by the Strategic Committee were
                  considered, corresponding to strategic guidelines that served as a
                  framework for defining lines of action and implementing measures.




       8
        The final document from the Strategic Committee is available on the
       website of the Action Plan.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                        page 35
       4.2.2 Lines of Action,
       Actions, and Milestones

                  These working groups identified the risks and opportunities that would
                  arise from their implementation, so at the end of the process which
                  included public consultation, they were adjusted and consolidated into
                  18 lines of action, which will be implemented through a set of actions and
                  milestones such as studies, plans, pilots, instruments, among others.

                  For the identification of measures, initially, an action map9 of public
                  services was developed, which was raised within the framework of the
                  interministerial working groups. This map included the actions of the
                  various public services that had direct and indirect impact on the
                  development of the green hydrogen industry. This was contrasted with
                  the lines of action: (1) prioritising those actions most pertinent or
                  strategic for implementation; (2) defining continuity actions for those in
                  development or scheduled; (3) identifying gaps to be filled with new
                  measures.

                  Based on the defined lines of action and implementing measures, the
                  Plan was structured considering roles and responsible institutions for the
                  actions, and implementation deadlines.




       9 The action map has around 360 actions identified and committed by 20
       institutions that have influence in the development of green hydrogen, at
       different stages of progress (completed, in progress, and scheduled).




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                        page 36
 4.3 MONITORING
 AND TRACKING

                  The implementation of this Plan will require interministerial
                  management and coordination of operational progress, as well as
                  strategic monitoring to evaluate progress in sustainability and within
                  the framework of the target images defined by the Strategic
                  Committee.

                  This work will be supported by indicators that, on one hand, account
                  for progress in strategic areas and address compliance with
                  sustainability criteria, as well as a monitoring process of the
                  implementation of the measures and commitments established.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                     page 37
               5.1 AGREED TARGET
               IMAGES

                               The Strategic Committee developed a document10 outlining a strategic
                               vision for the future of hydrogen in Chile. This proposal reflects the
                               desirable boundaries to promote the green hydrogen industry and also
                               to demand attributes of its global performance. Based on this vision,
                               among other relevant strategic inputs, specific measures were
                               established, as presented in this Action Plan document.

                               The Strategic Committee's vision was developed over six sessions and
                               structured into target images associated with five dimensions: (1)
                               Environmental, (2) International, (3) Economic, (4) Human capital and
                               technological development, and (5) Citizenship.




       SESSION 1   SESSION 2          SESSION 3           SESSION 4          SESSION 5           SESSION 6
DATE    JULY 31    AUGUST 22         SEPTEMBER 4         OCTOBER 12         OCTOBER 19          NOVEMBER 14
         2023        2023               2023                2023               2023                2023




                                The gradual construction of target images and a future vision around
                                different dimensions allowed the coordinating team of interministerial




                     10
                      The final document of the Strategic Committee is available on the
                     website of the Action Plan.




              Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                      page 39
                     working groups to integrate these guidelines into the final
                     definition of lines of action and measures included in this Plan.




    5.2 SUSTAINABILITY
    CRITERIA
    FOR INDUSTRY
    DEVELOPMENT

                     The sustainability criteria constitute strategic guidelines based on
                     the participatory process and the set of international and national
                     policies and regulations analysed. These criteria ensure the
                     incorporation of sustainability dimensions in the formulation of the
                     Plan, through the definition of rules or conditions to be met in the
                     development of the nascent green hydrogen industry, which will
                     allow for the assessment of the relevance, coherence, and need for
                     adjustment of the proposed courses of action.




          5.2.1 Strategic Framework

                     The analysis of international and national instruments, especially
                     the National Energy Policy and the National Green Hydrogen
                     Strategy, formed the basis for the construction of a strategic
                     framework to define and evaluate sustainability rules for the Plan.

                     In this review, notable initiatives from the following actors can be
                     highlighted:

          United Nations (UN)

                     •    International good practice principles for sustainable
                          infrastructure, 2021




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                        page 40
                •     Green hydrogen industrial clusters guidelines, UNIDO, 2023


       European Parliament
                •     A hydrogen strategy for a climate-neutral Europe, 2020

                •     European strategy for energy system integration, 2021


       European Commission
                •     EU energy commitment in a changing world, 2022

                •     A Green Deal Industrial Plan for the Net-Zero Age, 2023

                •     European Critical Raw materials, 2023

                •     Sustainability reporting standards, 2023


       Banking Sector
                •     Environmental and Social Framework, World Bank, 2017

                •     Performance standards on environmental and social sustainability,
                      IFC International Finance Corporation, 2012

                •     Environmental and Social Policy Framework, IDB, 2020

                •     Guideline on sustainability assessment of environmental, social,
                      and climate aspects: principles and processes, KfW Development
                      Bank, 2023

                •     Environmental and social standards, European Investment Bank
                      (EIB), 2022


       Associations
                •     Policy recommendations to accelerate hydrogen deployment for a
                      1.5°C   scenario,   World   Business    Council   for    Sustainable
                      Development, 2021




                    The review and analysis of these backgrounds, as well as other
                    elements of the participatory process of the Plan, formed the basis




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                               page 41
                    for the formulation of sustainability criteria. According to their
                    scope, these criteria identify the internal or structural aspects for the
                    development of the industry; the external or systemic components,
                    which are not under the control of the State or the industry; and the
                    role of the State.



      5.2.2 Description of
      Sustainability Criteria
"Timely and transparent governance for decision-
making, with the participation of various
stakeholders involved and articulated at territorial
levels to provide institutional support to a strategic
industry for the country."
                •     Multi-stakeholder participation at territorial levels throughout
                      the industry's lifecycle, ensuring the right to timely access to
                      information (benefits, costs, and risks), participation, and
                      effective    communication      for   comprehensive,     transparent,
                      inclusive decision-making with a gender perspective, thereby
                      preventing conflicts.

                •     Coordinated, synergistic, and articulated action by relevant
                      actors from both the public and private sectors, always aimed at
                      transparency, efficiency, and sustainability of public and private
                      investment and land use, with adaptive industry management
                      and its long-term consolidation.

                •     Transition to a clear, robust, efficient, and high-standard system
                      regarding enabling regulation and risk management, permits,
                      certifications, and monitoring, in line with industry challenges,
                      international commitments, and the country's territorial diversity
                      and cultural identity.


"Competitive industry that generates economic
benefits for the country within the global energy
transition framework."




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                             page 42
           •    Enhance domestic demand and industrialisation and transfer benefits to
                society through the development of productive chains that add value to
                regions and the national economy, supported by external demand.

           •    Competitive industry within the framework of international trade standards,
                transparent in production costs and benefits, along with the development
                of    international    partnerships    for    positioning,    technological
                complementarity, and timely access to financing, inputs, equipment, and
                raw materials.

           •    Creation of conditions for certainty, stability, innovation, and development
                as the basis for boosting investment and market demand towards the
                consolidation of a sustainable industry in the long term.


      "Industry developed respecting ecosystems and
      their environmental services and interactions,
      considering the best available standards, within the
      framework of the climate crisis, biodiversity loss,
      and pollution”.

           •    Development of the industry and its value chain according to the
                sustainability, preventive and precautionary principle, along with due
                diligence, reducing the demand for natural resources and energy,
                preventing, mitigating, or, failing that, compensating for its impacts on
                ecosystem ecological continuity, and avoiding effects on human safety and
                health.

           •    Decarbonised industry that contributes to achieving national and
                international climate goals and reducing emissions, contributes to the
                objectives of a just energy transition, and helps drive the country's
                sustainable industrialisation.

           •    Timely and coherent environmental management system, based on
                generating knowledge and public information on origin conditions and
                their changes (air, water, and soil) to establish requirements (regulation)
                and   international   reference   standards   for   ecosystem   protection,
                biodiversity, and maintenance of environmental services, considering
                cumulative and synergistic effects on the environment.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                       page 43
"Balanced integration of the industry, compatible
with territorial conditions and dynamics,
addressing the geographical, cultural,
environmental, and economic diversity of the
country."

    •    Industry, in its value chain, preventing the displacement of local
         communities and managing the effects of migration and labour
         commuting, such as demand for transportation, residence, and equipment.


    •    Demand management and coordinated stage-by-stage management of
         enabling infrastructure supply under the logic of efficient, shared, and/or
         multipurpose use, starting from existing resources to derive new
         requirements.


    •    Territorial planning and timely energy planning for industry deployment,
         respecting the sensitivities and interests of its inhabitants, comprehensively
         addressing hydrogen and its derivatives' value chain components, balance,
         and synergy with other activities and uses, and the human settlement
         system.


"Industry with good practices contributing to
social well-being and strengthening local
development”.

    •    Industry that avoids, minimises, compensates for, or repairs the effects on
         cultural, traditional, gender, and human rights values, as well as livelihoods,
         providing opportunities for decent work and contributing to social welfare.


    •    Creation and distribution of benefits in the industry's operating territory,
         achieving a balance between social and economic priorities, contributing
         to the reduction of energy poverty.


    •    Timely development of advanced human capital in an innovation and
         development environment, oriented towards the requirements of the
         energy transition, along with the needs of the territory and its inhabitants,
         to contribute to human development and improve people's quality of life.


         The sustainability criteria were a key element for adjusting the Plan's
         preliminary initiatives. As a result of this exercise and subsequent evaluation,


Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                   page 44
                these criteria were adapted and supplemented under the logic of specific
                measures addressing identified opportunities and risks.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                           page 45
 5.3 GOVERNANCE
 STRUCTURE

                 During the year 2021, through a legal amendment to Decree Law 2,224
                 that creates the Ministry of Energy and the National Energy Commission,
                 "hydrogen and fuels from hydrogen, and other energy sources and energy
                 vectors" were incorporated into Article 3 of said legal body as part of the
                 matters within the energy sector, corresponding "to the Ministry of Energy,
                 to develop and coordinate plans, policies, and standards for the proper
                 development of the sector, ensure compliance, and advise the
                 Government on all matters related to energy."




                 The proposed governance structure for the Green Hydrogen Action Plan
                 is framed within the Green Hydrogen Industry Development Committee,
                 created in 2022 through CORFO Resolution No. 60, whose objective has
                 been to accelerate the sustainable development of the green hydrogen
                 industry and its derivatives in Chile. The proposed governance includes the
                 entities created under the Committee - the Interministerial Council, the
                 Technical Working Group, the Advisory Council, and administrative
                 coordination through the Executive Directorate - and includes the Ministry
                 of Energy with the role of strategic monitoring of the Action Plan
                 implementation, Regional Governments for the elaboration of regional
                 roadmaps, the formation of regional councils, and a political/strategic level
                 interaction with the Ministry of Energy's standing committee.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                         page 46
FIGURE   8: GOVERNANCE STRUCTURE FOR THE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT OF GREEN HYDROGEN IN CHILE




                                     In the figure below, at the top of the section (pink), the bodies or dialogue
                                     spaces overseeing the implementation of the Action Plan are mentioned.
                                     In the centre (blue), the teams responsible for various aspects of
                                     coordination and monitoring are mentioned. Finally, at the bottom (light
                                     blue), the dialogue spaces tasked with advising and providing
                                     recommendations to the higher levels of the box for decision-making are
                                     presented, and in turn, providing relevant information for this purpose.

                                     The interaction between the different bodies and dialogue spaces
                                     mentioned in the box is explained below:




                   Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                          page 47
Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan   page 48
5.3.1 Green Hydrogen
Industry Development
Committee

          The Committee aims to accelerate the sustainable development of the
          green hydrogen industry and its derivatives in Chile. It was created by
          CORFO's Exempt Resolution No. 60 of 2022 and is composed of the
          Interministerial Council, Technical Working Group, Advisory Council, and
          the Executive Directorate.

          Within the framework of the Action Plan, its role will be to ensure proper
          implementation and the commitment of the institutions and units
          responsible for executing it. To fulfil this function, it will be necessary to
          review and adjust the Resolution that created it.




5.3.2 Interministerial Council

          The Council leads the previously described Committee. Its function is to
          support and strategically coordinate the decisions of public institutions
          within the framework of the Green Hydrogen Action Plan. Currently, it is
          composed of eleven ministries: Energy; Economy, Development, and
          Tourism; Finance; Foreign Affairs; Social Development and Family; Public
          Works; Transportation and Telecommunications; National Assets;
          Environment;    Agriculture;   Science,    Technology,    Knowledge,     and
          Innovation; and CORFO. It is chaired by the Minister of Energy, and its
          vice-chair is the Executive Vice President of CORFO.


          In addition to the powers defined by Resolution 60 of June 2022, the
          Council is expected to influence all decisions of public institutions related
          to the allocation of resources, procedures, and commitments to
          implement the Green Hydrogen Action Plan. Furthermore, those Regional
          Governments that develop local roadmaps will also participate in the




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                  page 49
                  interministerial   council   to   ensure   proper   coordination    in   the
                  implementation of actions.




      5.3.3 Interministerial
      Technical Working Group

                  It will be composed of focal points from the ministries that are part of the
                  Interministerial Council. The role of the Interministerial Technical
                  Working Group is to support, provide background information, and
                  provide rationale to the Interministerial Council for decision-making
                  regarding priorities, strategic public-public coordination, financing of key
                  initiatives, among other matters. In turn, the Technical Working Group
                  will support the operationalisation of public policy, associated with
                  decisions on the implementation of the Green Hydrogen Action Plan.

                  The Technical Working Group is chaired by a representative of the
                  Ministry of Energy, and the vice-chairmanship is held by a representative
                  of CORFO.




      5.3.4 Regional Governments

                 Regional Governments will be responsible for leading regional
                 governance for the deployment of the green hydrogen industry and its
                 derivatives. They, must consider their respective territorial contexts,
                 coordinating with other local authorities and representative actors of the
                 various interests within the regional ecosystem. Additionally, they must
                 establish channels of communication and feedback with national
                 governance through the Interministerial Council.

                 To do this, they may develop roadmaps that allow them to specify and
                 complement, according to each regional reality, the Green Hydrogen




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                         page 50
                  Action Plan 2023-2030, considering the national guidelines of the Plan.

                  To design and implement regional roadmaps, Regional Governments will
                  have the responsibility to create regional governance structures with, at
                  least, a Regional Green Hydrogen Council.




      5.3.5 Ministry of Energy

                  Based on the Ministry of Energy's mandates regarding hydrogen and its
                  derivatives, as established in Decree Law 2,224, this ministry has the role
                  of coordinating the strategic implementation of the Plan, including:


                      1. Oversight of its management and interministerial coordination of
                           operational progress, maintaining a close relationship with the
                           Technical Committee of the Green Hydrogen Committee to
                           identify   possible    synergies   and    challenges    in    Plan
                           implementation.


                      2.   Strategic monitoring of the industry, ensuring coherence in
                           associated public policy instruments, such as the Strategy and
                           Action Plan, maintaining a close relationship with the Advisory
                           Council, Permanent Committee, and the Green Hydrogen
                           Interministerial Council. This tracking will evaluate how the
                           deployment of the green hydrogen industry contributes to the
                           goals set out in the Green Hydrogen Strategy and the National
                           Energy Policy.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                        page 51
5.3.6 Executive Directorate

           Its role will be to execute and implement development instruments
           included in the Green Hydrogen Action Plan, in addition to convening
           sessions of the Interministerial Council, among other administrative
           matters.

           Within the framework of the Plan, the executive directorate will
           administratively coordinate the operation of the Interministerial Council,
           the Technical Committee, and the Advisory Council, convening meetings
           and working groups.




5.3.7 External Advisory and
multi-stakeholder Linkage

Permanent Council of the
Ministry of Energy

The Ministry of Energy will establish a permanent External Council with the
participation of high-level political/strategic stakeholders. Its function will be to
discuss the progress of the objectives and goals of the energy policy and provide
recommendations regarding the strategic direction of the ministry. The Council will
advise on potential adjustments to long-term objectives and goals or strategic
measures, ensuring proper interaction and coherence between the Green Hydrogen
Action Plan, the Decarbonisation Plan, and the Sectoral Plan for Mitigation and
Adaptation to Climate Change.


     Within the governance framework for hydrogen, this Council will aim to
     provide strategic and policy guidance associated with the implementation and
     monitoring of the Plan, considering the objective images developed by the
     Strategic Committee of GH2 and the interrelationships and impact of the Plan's
     implementation on the country's long-term energy-related objectives




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                 page 52
       outlined in the National Energy Policy and the Climate Change Framework Law.

       The deliberations of this Council will be informed by information and analysis
       provided by the Ministry of Energy as part of the Action Plan's monitoring (PMO)
       and the strategic monitoring of long-term objectives and goals.




 Advisory Council

       Comprised of stakeholders from the public sector, private sector, academia,
       business associations, regional governments, and non-governmental organisations
       with interests related to the green hydrogen and derivatives industry. Its purpose is
       to provide technical advice, based on its areas of expertise, to the Interministerial
       Council to facilitate decisions related to potential barriers and opportunities
       identified during the Plan's implementation.


       Given the dynamism in the advancement of the green hydrogen industry in Chile
       and the various topics to be addressed in line with the breadth of the value chain,
       the composition of the Advisory Council should be periodically reviewed to ensure
       that it reflects the diverse perspectives needed for such an advisory body.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                        page 53
Regional Green Hydrogen
Councils

 Multi-stakeholder governance for the design and implementation of regional
 roadmaps for green hydrogen, whose function will be to inform decision-making on
 green hydrogen from various territorial and sectoral perspectives. Regional
 Governments will define and lead the formation and operation of these councils,
 being able to use existing instances whose objectives are compatible with the
 purpose of this Action Plan and the various regional roadmaps. These councils
 should bring together representatives from the public sector, the private sector,
 academia, civil society, as well as representation of Indigenous peoples present in
 the region.




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan               page 54
 6.1 GOVERNANCE
 AND MULTI-
 STAKEHOLDER
 PARTICIPATION
                 Actions regarding hydrogen and its derivatives must be coordinated and
                 developed with multiple ministries and State agencies, understanding
                 that its value chain requires the concerted effort of different government
                 portfolios, as well as a close and collaborative relationship between the
                 central level and regions. Therefore, robust governance and multi-
                 stakeholder participation are crucial for the implementation of the Green
                 Hydrogen Action Plan 2023-2030. This governance is the vehicle through
                 which the Action Plan is implemented, decisions are made, and progress
                 is monitored. It includes all mechanisms, processes, and institutions - with
                 roles and responsibilities - through which the actions of this Plan are
                 articulated, executed, and monitored.

                 Below, the actions and milestones necessary to strengthen governance
                 for the implementation of the Action Plan are detailed, allowing for the
                 deployment of the industry in the country's different territories, as well as
                 its respective monitoring through PMO-type management control.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                         page 56
LINE OF ACTION 1:
GOVERNANCE AND MULTI-STAKEHOLDER PARTICIPATION

                              ACTIONS
1. Update the composition of the Green Hydrogen Interministerial Council
and its associated Technical Committee


2. Develop regional roadmaps under the national Action Plan



3. Establish public-private Regional Green Hydrogen Councils, with
representation from civil society and Indigenous peoples, in regions with
roadmaps.

4. Implement a Plan monitoring system using project management
methodology (PMO)


5. Establish methodology for strategic monitoring and monitoring of the
action plan


6. Update the National Green Hydrogen Strategy




 MILESTONES

     Modification of Res. Ex. 60, by CORFO, from 2022                         Definition of monitoring indicators for the commitments of this Plan

              Documents elaborated: in Biobío (2), in Antofagasta (3),        First analysis of Plan progress and recommendation for action updates
              in Valparaíso (4)
     Establishment of Councils in Magallanes and Chilean                      Validation and update of commitments of the current strategy
     Antarctica, Biobío, and Antofagasta
                                                                              Update of the National GH2 Strategy aligned with a Sustainable Industrial
     Publication of improvement observations documents for
                                                                              Development Policy of the country
     respective roadmaps from multi-stakeholder councils

                                                                              Review of the Green Hydrogen Action Plan according to the updated Strategy
     Platform loaded with milestones and responsible parties

                                                                            Note: Bar colours only indicate complementarity of
                                                                                               measures.




                         Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                                  page 57
Action 1. Update the
composition of the Green
Hydrogen Interministerial
Council and its associated
Technical Committee to meet
current needs for the
sustainable deployment of the
industry

      Objective: Update       the composition and functioning of the Green Hydrogen

     Committee and its various elements (such as the Interministerial Council and the
     Technical Committee) to respond to the coordination needs for the sustainable
     deployment of the industry. This sector has shown great dynamism, with various
     public institutions participating to ensure sustainable development of the industry.
     Therefore, it is necessary to evaluate the composition of the Interministerial Council
     and the Technical Committee and update their members, based on those institutions
     that are key to the implementation of the Plan. Some necessary changes to be made,
     among others, include the incorporation of the Ministries of Defence, Education,
     Housing and Urban Development, and Women and Gender Equality.


      Additionally, the roles and functions detailed in CORFO Resolution No. 60 of 2022,
     which creates the Green Hydrogen Industry Development Committee, will be
     reviewed, and modified to align them with the plan's lines of action.


     Timeline: 2024


     Milestone:

     •    2024: Amendment to CORFO Resolution No. 60 of 2022.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                      page 58
  Responsible Institution:             CORFO with the support of the Ministry of

  Energy in its role as chair of the Interministerial Council, in conjunction with
  institutions related to the Green Hydrogen Committee.




Action 2. Develop regional
roadmaps under the Green
Hydrogen Action Plan

  Objective:      Develop regional roadmaps, based on the national guidelines
  outlined in this Action Plan document. This measure includes establishing regional
  governance led by Regional Governments, incorporating other local authorities
  and relevant stakeholders from the regional ecosystem, establishing channels of
  communication     and    feedback    with   national   governance    through    the
  Interministerial Council. This is expected to promote local productive capacity and
  social development, in line with the social and environmental reality of the region,
  making efficient and balanced use of the available resources and maximising the
  development opportunities provided by the industry in terms of employment,
  value chains, technological development, etc.

  Based on the process and results of the roadmaps, instruments to implement the
  defined measures will be enhanced, such as voluntary public-private-civil society
  agreements to achieve adequate management and coordination between the
  State, regional governments, local actors, and companies, on specific issues. To
  achieve this, it will be necessary to establish the areas to be addressed, depending
  on each territory. In this regard, work has already begun on more specific
  agreements, such as the Collaboration Protocol in Magallanes, signed between the
  Ministries of Economy, Development, and Tourism; Energy; Public Works; with the
  Magallanes Regional Government; and the Trade Association of Green Hydrogen
  Producers and their Derivatives in Magallanes. Similarly, the Magallanes Regional
  Government, together with the Ministry of Women and Gender Equality, and the
  Ministry of Energy, signed an agreement to promote the inclusion of women in the




  Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                 page 59
       green hydrogen industry, and in training and education initiatives in the region.

       Some regions have already begun work on building regional roadmaps, which have
       been considered by the Action Plan, and must ensure intrinsic coherence between
       instruments of different territorial scales. For example, the Magallanes and Chilean
       Antarctic Regional Government and CORFO, through the Regional Transform
       Programme "Green Hydrogen Magallanes," have developed a roadmap with actions
       to address various identified, prioritised, and validated gaps11. Based on the
       identified gaps, five strategic axes were defined for effective and structured
       roadmap development, taking into account the principles of the National Green
       Hydrogen Strategy. Similarly, in the Antofagasta Region, a Regional Green Hydrogen
       Commission led by the Regional Government was established, where work axes
       were also defined. Finally, the Biobío Region is also developing its regional roadmap,
       supported by CORFO's Regional Transform Programme.


       Timeline: From 2024.

       Milestones:

       Definitive version of regional roadmaps developed for - at least - the following
       regions:


       •    2024: Biobío Roadmap.


       •    2025: Antofagasta Roadmap.


       •    2026: Valparaíso Roadmap.


       Responsible Institution: Regional Governments.




       11
         Link to document (year 1):
       https://energia.gob.cl/sites/default/files/documentos/resumen hoja de ruta
       programatransformaGH2 rev. 0.pdf




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                        page 60
Action 3. Establish public-
private regional councils for
Green Hydrogen, with
representation from civil society
and Indigenous peoples, in
regions where regional
roadmaps are being developed


  Objective:        Create regional governance, or adapt an existing governance
  structure, to strengthen the participatory and sustainability dimensions in the
  energy transition, considering the implications of green hydrogen industry
  development on the productive, socioeconomic, and territorial reconversion of
  regions, seeking to balance the transition and industry development with the
  safeguarding of cultural and traditional values, as well as livelihoods, providing
  opportunities for decent work and contributing to social well-being throughout its
  life cycle.

  This   regional   and   multi-stakeholder   governance,    which    will   incorporate
  representation from the public sector, private sector, academia, civil society
  organisations (local, environmental organisations, guilds, unions), and indigenous
  peoples present in the region, must inform decision-making on green hydrogen
  from different territorial and sectoral perspectives, transparently disclosing the
  benefits, externalities, and risks of the industry, for which it must consider a
  methodology and operation specially designed to ensure effective and balanced
  dialogue among diverse actors with information, knowledge, and influence
  asymmetries. In this framework, it is suggested that, to respect the collective rights
  of Indigenous peoples present in the region, additional and differentiated dialogue
  spaces be established, so that these interests can be represented in the Regional
  Green Hydrogen Council. This will be reflected in the development of regional
  roadmaps under the Green Hydrogen Action Plan 2023-2030.

  In regions where progress has been made in this area, governance will be built on
  existing structures, expanding their scope and representation with the incorporation




  Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                 page 61
of diverse actors and a gender focus. Currently, there is progress in Magallanes
(Transforma Magallanes), Antofagasta (Regional Green Hydrogen Commission), and
Biobío (Transforma Biobío), among others, and it is suggested that they review and
coordinate their governance spaces to ensure the incorporation of different actors
with interests that could be affected, and stakeholders interested in industry
development.


Timeline: Starting from 2024.

Milestones:
•   2024: Establish councils or modify existing structures,
    through administrative action, in at least the following regions: Magallanes and
    Chilean Antarctica, Biobío, and Antofagasta.


•   2026: The three indicated regions have published documents with
    improvement observations for their respective regional green hydrogen
    roadmaps, from the multi-stakeholder GH2 council.


Responsible Institution: Regional Governments.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                page 62
 Action 4. Implement a Plan
 Tracking System using Project
 Management Methodology
 (PMO)

       Objective: As part of the role established in this governance for the Ministry of
       Energy, mechanisms for tracking and monitoring commitments outlined in this
       document will be established. For tracking the fulfilment of milestones defined in each
       line of action, a Project Management Methodology (PMO) will be established, led by
       the Planning and Management Control Unit of the Ministry of Energy. The
       methodology will require specific responsibilities (working teams within each
       responsible   institution),   measurable   milestones,   and   clear   deadlines.   This
       methodology will contribute to visualising progress to prioritise necessary
       coordination, as well as raising alerts about possible deviations from the planned
       activities.


       Timeline: 2024-2030

       Milestones:
       •    2024: Platform loaded with milestones and responsible parties (specific
            working teams within the institutions).


       •    2024-2030: Continuous monitoring of the implementation of specific actions
            with quarterly reporting to the Interministerial Council of the Green Hydrogen
            Industry Development Committee.


       Responsible Institution: Ministry of Energy.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                        page 63
 Action 5. Establish methodology
 for the strategic monitoring and
 tracking of commitments in this
 Action Plan

       Objective: As part of the role established in this governance for the Ministry of
       Energy, mechanisms for monitoring and tracking both the commitments outlined in
       this document and the evaluation and measurement of the industry's impact through
       several types of indicators, including sustainability indicators, will be defined.

       The strategic monitoring will be crucial for periodically assessing whether the
       development of green hydrogen and its derivatives is contributing to the country's
       achievement of the goals set forth in the Green Hydrogen Strategy, as well as the long-
       term objectives established in guiding documents, such as the National Energy Policy
       (set of goals for various energy areas), the Climate Change Framework Law (national
       carbon neutrality legal target by 2050), and decarbonisation commitments. The
       strategic monitoring analyses will be a key input for the deliberation and eventual
       recommendations emanating from the Permanent Council of the Ministry of Energy,
       tasks that are the responsibility of the Ministry of Energy's Policy and Strategic
       Monitoring Unit.

       Based on the results of the Plan implementation monitoring, and the dynamism
       evidenced around the green hydrogen industry, it is anticipated that it will be
       necessary to analyse an update of the planned actions and/or milestones in the short
       term and complement them with those that arise, maintaining close inter-institutional
       collaboration within the proposed governance framework.


       Timeline: 2024-2030




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                           page 64
       Milestones:
       •   2024: Define tracking indicators for the commitments of this Plan,
           including those related to sustainability.


       •   2025: First progress analysis of the Plan and recommendations for
           action updates.


       •   2025-2030: Continuous strategic monitoring and tracking of the
           commitments of the Action Plan.


       Responsible Institution: Ministry of Energy.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                      page 65
 Action 6. Update of the National
 Green Hydrogen Strategy



       Objective: In line with the commitments made in the current strategy, an update
       of the National Green Hydrogen Strategy must be carried out when 5 years have
       elapsed since its publication. This update will focus efforts on developing a National
       Sustainable Industrial Development Policy, with a focus on the green hydrogen
       industry, ammonia, and various derivatives and vectors derived from hydrogen (2025-
       2026). Thus, upon having a new Strategy or Industrial Policy, the Action Plan must be
       reviewed and updated accordingly (2026-2027).


       Timeline: 2024: Initiate        the process to update the National Green Hydrogen

       Strategy for publication in 2026.


       Milestones:
       •   2024: Validation and updating of assumptions of the Strategy (commitment
           of the current strategy).


       •   2026: Update the National Green Hydrogen Strategy, in line with a
           sustainable industrial development policy for the country.


       •   2027: Review of the Green Hydrogen Action Plan according to the
           updated Strategy.


       Responsible Institution:              Ministry of Energy, in coordination with all

       institutions that are part of the Green Hydrogen Industry Development Committee.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                         page 66
 6.2 INFORMATION,
 DISSEMINATION,
 AND CIVIC EDUCATION

                 Information, education, and the provision of clear and centralised
                 consultation channels are fundamental for the emerging green hydrogen
                 industry and its derivatives to involve as many perspectives and experiences
                 from different fields as possible, contributing to its sustainability over time,
                 following the guidelines for access to information and information
                 generation and dissemination established in the Escazú Agreement.

                 Having relevant information available to various stakeholders is crucial for
                 harmonious coexistence in territories. In particular, people's access to
                 timely, secure, and updated information implies reducing information gaps
                 and asymmetries, allowing greater transparency in holding the state
                 accountable for its decisions and actions, serving as a tool to build trust,
                 and having the potential to prevent conflicts among diverse groups of
                 stakeholders.

                 Within this line of action, commitments are made both to provide
                 information to diverse types of audiences, including experiences that bring
                 hydrogen closer to the public, and to advance education related to
                 hydrogen.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                         page 67
LINE OF ACTION 2:
INFORMATION, DISSEMINATION, AND CIVIC EDUCATION

                              ACTIONS

7. Develop informative and educational material for citizens about green
hydrogen and its derivatives


8. Develop and maintain an updated hydrogen explorer




9. Develop a comprehensive and centralised information and consultation
system about green hydrogen and its derivatives



10. Promote education about green hydrogen through the Sustainable
Education Programme




MILESTONES
                                                                           Note: Bar colours only indicate complementarity of measures.
             Material available in the first region of the country

             Material developed and available nationwide

            Launch of the Green Hydrogen Explorer

            First version of the platform

            Educational material developed and available




                         Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                          page 68
Action 7. Develop informational
and educational material for
citizens about green hydrogen



  Objective:      Develop content for communication and educational campaigns
  regarding green hydrogen and its development nationwide. This material will
  include graphical and/or visual content that can be disseminated through various
  channels, such as social media, government agency websites, and distribution
  through municipalities, regional ministries, among others.

  The goal is to educate the population about the impacts, challenges, and benefits
  of the green hydrogen industry, thereby reducing information asymmetries that may
  exist among different societal actors.


  Timeline: 2023-2030.

  Milestones:
  •   2024: Material available in a first region in the country.


  •   2025: Material developed and available nationwide.


  Responsible Institution:                 Ministry of Energy with support from the

  Ministry of Education and the Spanish Agency for International Development
  Cooperation (AECID from its acronym in Spanish).




  Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                  page 69
Action 8. Develop and maintain
the Green Hydrogen Explorer



 Objective: Make       available a tool that presents information and visualisation
 associated with the development potential for green hydrogen projects based on
 renewable resources in the continental Chilean territory. This tool aims to
 complement the delivery of specialised information related to the green hydrogen
 industry. The explorer will have three main functions: a visualiser of green hydrogen
 production potential according to its Levelised Cost of Hydrogen (LCOH), a
 calculator for users to calculate the LCOH according to their parameters, and a
 project visualiser.


 Timeline: 2023-2030

 Milestone:
 •    First half of 2024: Launch of the Green Hydrogen Explorer.


 Responsible Institution: Ministry of Energy.




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                   page 70
Action 9. Develop a general and
centralised information and
consultation system on green
hydrogen

 Objective: A centralised information system for the green hydrogen industry
 will be developed to facilitate the delivery of information in a simple and
 understandable manner for various stakeholders. This information will be available
 through a platform for general access.


 The platform will contain consolidated information for different dimensions,
 territorial scales, project life cycles, and other aspects such as gender and human
 rights standards. It will serve as a fundamental tool for industry transparency in costs
 and benefits, civic participation, and community involvement in matters of their
 interest. The development of this system will be in line with the Participatory
 Implementation Plan of the Escazú Agreement (PIPE).


 To achieve this, the development and implementation of a dynamic website is
 proposed, which will preliminarily include:


 •   A viewer containing public information at a regional scale on the location and
     status of projects associated with green hydrogen and derivatives, including
     official information and data from public baselines.


 •   Periodic reporting systems from green hydrogen project holders, displaying
     prevention, mitigation, and compensation measures, including information on
     job positions and employment generation estimates (distinguishing between
     direct and indirect jobs).


 •   Transparent visualisation of data resulting from standards indicators for
     different green hydrogen projects in the territories.


 •   Information on greenhouse gas emissions from the industry across its
     production chain, allowing for detailed monitoring of contributions in this area.




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                   page 71
•   Information on the implementation progress and sustainability indicators of the
     Green Hydrogen Action Plan.


•   Information on the actions of various instances related to the governance of
     green hydrogen, such as minutes of the Green Hydrogen Committee, among
     others.


•   Information on the bidding of public lands.


•   Information on development potential and costs.


•   Information on norms and regulations associated with the industry's
     development.


•   Integration of public information from sources such as Open Energy, the Green
     Hydrogen Explorer, the Superintendency of Electricity and Fuels, the
     Environmental Impact Assessment System, the National Environmental
     Inspection Information System, the Pollutant Release and Transfer Register,
     among others.


•   Provision of a general civic consultation system on the industry.


•   Information on funding opportunities and other types of support from CORFO
     or other institutions.


Timeline: 2024-2030

Milestone:
•   First half of 2025: First version of the platform.


Responsible Institution: Ministry of Energy.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                page 72
Action 10. Promote education on
green hydrogen through the
Sustainable Education
Programme

 Objective:      Incorporate the topic of green hydrogen into the educational
 materials and didactic resources of the Sustainable Education Programme,
 promoting energy education that enables educational communities to understand
 advances in the energy sector towards sustainable development, targeting most
 educational levels, with a focus on technical-professional secondary education.


 Timeline: 2024-2025

 Milestone:
 •   First half of 2025: Educational material developed and available.


 Responsible Institution:

 •   Ministry of Energy.


 •   Ministry of Education.




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                page 73
 6.3 ECONOMIC AND
 FINANCIAL MECHANISMS TO
 BOOST THE INDUSTRY


                  The green hydrogen and derivatives industry represents an opportunity
                  for the economic transformation of the country and its regions through
                  productive and energy diversification.


                  It is relevant to leverage Chile's advantages in renewable energy
                  resources and global energy transition to position the country as an
                  exporter of clean fuels and to sophisticate the export basket of goods
                  and services with sustainability attributes.


                  For the green hydrogen and derivatives industry to develop in Chile and
                  for projects of different scales to materialise, the State must create
                  conditions of certainty and stability, facilitate competitiveness, and
                  leverage private investments through financial support from public policy
                  to decrease costs and mitigate financial risks.


                  Currently, green hydrogen and ammonia projects have not yet reached
                  their breakeven point in profitability, so it is important that they can be
                  accompanied by different incentives for the early start of the industry,
                  with all the opportunities that this will bring to the country. This implies
                  a relevant public-private role to mitigate risks that allow obtaining
                  profitability from early hydrogen and ammonia projects, or first movers.

                  Initiatives aimed at supporting the first industrial projects of green
                  hydrogen and derivatives, and improving competitiveness against fossil
                  fuels, will initiate the operation of a market, in addition to reducing
                  various uncertainties, risks, and enabling economies of scale and scope.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                         page 74
                  The State, through its institutions, promotes and seeks to catalyse private
                  investment in green hydrogen and derivatives production and demand
                  projects through financial instruments aimed at mitigating financial risks,
                  reducing costs, and providing positive signalling that accelerates the
                  materialisation of investments for the development of the GH2 industry
                  in Chile.


                  Below are the actions and milestones aimed at economically and
                  financially supporting the green hydrogen and derivatives industry
                  throughout its value chain.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                        page 75
  LINE OF ACTION 3:
  ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL MECHANISMS TO BOOST THE INDUSTRY
                                   ACTIONS

  11. Allocate state lands for the development of the green hydrogen and
  its derivatives industry

  12. Enhance CORFO's promotion instruments with a focus on green
  hydrogen

  13. Boost domestic/national demand for hydrogen through an Emissions
  Trading System (ETS)

  14. Create a fund for tax credits attributable to the first category tax
  including the "green" dimension

  15. Implement a development rate for investment that allows for a reduction
  in first category taxes for investments that increase business productivity


  16. Tax incentive for Research and Development, through the strengthening
  of Law 20,241

  17. Update CORFO's "Green Credit" instrument to banking and
  non-banking financial intermediaries
  18. Implement a financing facility for green hydrogen projects and its value
  chain

  19. Accompany projects for the production and/or consumption of green
  hydrogen and derivatives with financial support and advisory services


  20. Accelerate the implementation of the first industrial projects of green
  hydrogen and derivatives through financing rounds



MILESTONES
           Closure of the first process of allocation of state lands (Window to the Future)       Prospecting work for Green Credit placement
           Publication of the call for the second process of allocation                           Constitution of the Green Hydrogen Guarantee Fund
           Annual call for each CORFO instrument
                                                                                                  Formal opening and start of the "Facility GH2" Desk with Green Credit
          Design of the pilot ETS programme for the energy sector
                                                                                                  Opening of the FSA call (Financial Assistance Mechanism)
           Implementation of the pilot ETS programme

                    Submission of the bill to Congress (specific to each case)                    Start of public-private working group sessions

                    Approval of the bill (specific to each case)                                  Closure of the first call of the financing round initiated in 2021

           Update and operation in the first semester of 2024                                     Evaluation of opening new financing rounds


                                                                                              Note: Bar colours only indicate complementarity of measures.




                        Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                                        page 76
Action 11. Allocation of state
lands for the green hydrogen
industry and its derivatives.
Closure of the current process
and initiation of a new process
for first projects

  Objective: Allocate and manage state lands for the development of the green
  hydrogen industry and its derivatives, considering the territorial compatibility of the
  requests, within the framework of the "Ventana al Futuro" (Window to the Future)
  initiative (Exempt Resolution No. 998/2021 and No. 827/2022, of the Ministry of
  National Assets approving the National Plan for the Promotion of Green Hydrogen
  Production on State Land). In this sense, the closure of this process will be
  accelerated to implement the projects that will trigger the industry in the northern
  macrozone (first movers), mainly in the Antofagasta Region, and provide certainty
  to other projects seeking to settle in the coming years.

  Additionally, a second process for the allocation of state lands for the development
  of the green hydrogen industry and its derivatives will be developed, considering
  criteria of economic feasibility, location in areas with a high presence of projects
  associated with the value chain of green hydrogen, and compliance with
  requirements for the real advancement of each project (time to market), territorial
  compatibility, and sustainability criteria. In this process, incentives in terms of
  concessional rent, guarantees, and/or coordination of the allocation of lands and
  easement strips will be evaluated, prioritising early projects of industrial scale.


  Timeline: 2024-2025



  Milestones:
  •   2024: Closure of the first process of allocation of state lands "Ventana al Futuro"
  (Window to the Future).




  Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                    page 77
 •   2025: Publication of the call for the second process of direct allocation of
     state lands for first hydrogen, ammonia, or other derivative projects.


 Responsible Institution: Ministry of National Assets, with support from
 the Ministry of Energy and Ministry of Economy, Development, and Tourism.




Action 12. Strengthening
CORFO's promotion instruments
with a focus on green hydrogen

 Objective: CORFO's promotion instruments allow, among other things, to solve
 financing access problems for activities associated with technological and/or
 productive development. The purpose of this action will be to focus some of
 CORFO's instruments to address the various technological development challenges
 of green hydrogen throughout the value chain. Several of these instruments are
 being supported by the Sustainable Productive Development Programme of the
 Ministry of Economy. It includes:


 a. Strategic Technological Programmes (PTEC from its acronym in
     Spanish): PTECs aim to increase the rate of technological innovation in
     products and processes of companies in specific productive and/or economic
     sectors, through the articulated execution of portfolios of technological
     development projects that allow reducing and/or closing the identified gaps,
     improving the sector's productivity, and contributing to its diversification
     and/or sophistication. In 2023, 5 hydrogen PTECs were awarded with the
     objective of promoting demand in the industry. During 2024, a new call will be
     made for green hydrogen demand and another for manufacturing in the value
     chain. Projects can access financing of up to 3.5 billion Chilean pesos each. This
     program is supported by the Ministry of Economy through the Sustainable
     Productive Development Programme (DPS from its acronym in Spanish).




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                 page 78
b. Human Capital Instrument for Innovation: Developing instruments that
    stimulate and improve the technological capacity of companies, through the
    incorporation, within the company, of expert professionals (advanced human
    capital or with extensive level of experience in the required professional and/or
    technical area) in R&D&I, who identify opportunities for companies in terms of
    productivity and/or competitiveness and address them through an innovation
    or R&D process. This instrument is supported by the Ministry of Economy
    through the Sustainable Productive Development Programme (DPS).


c. Create and Validate Instrument: To support the development of new or
    improved products, processes, and/or services based on technology, from
    prototypes to their technical validation on an industrial and commercial scale
    that solve problems and/or challenges of the productive sector or address a
    market opportunity, through research and development (R&D&I). The
    programme has two modalities: Business and Collaborative, meaning that
    development can be carried out with the company's own capabilities (Business)
    or with external capabilities (Collaborative). This instrument is supported by the
    Ministry of Economy through the Sustainable Productive Development
    Programme (DPS).


d. High Technology Innovate Instrument: Focused on supporting R&D&I
    projects with high technological risk to scale globally. The specific objectives of
    this instrument include: (a) Supporting the development of new products,
    services, and/or processes of high technological sophistication; (b) Supporting
    the design and development of a strategy for the protection and
    commercialisation of the results obtained, and (c) Strengthening R&D&I
    capabilities in companies. This instrument is supported by the Ministry of
    Economy through the Sustainable Productive Development Programme (DPS).


e. Viralise Instrument: Aims to promote the reinforcement of the
    entrepreneurial and innovation environment/culture, and thus contribute to
    improving the conditions under which entrepreneurial activity takes place. This
    is developed through programmes of broad scope that validate and promote
    the option of entrepreneurship and the use of innovation as privileged tools for
    economic and social development. This instrument is supported by the Ministry
    of Economy through the Sustainable Productive Development Programme
    (DPS).




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                  page 79
f.   Power Instrument: With the aim of providing support and specialised
     services of incubation, collaborative workspace, mentoring, and acceleration to
     dynamic ventures in their gestation process, to strengthen and develop them,
     thereby increasing their chances of success in high-risk commercial stages, to
     their growth and internationalisation.


g. Scaling Instrument: To support the development of high-growth potential
     ventures that have completed the creation and start-up stages, by co-financing
     activities for the design and execution of business plans on a global scale. This
     instrument is aimed at supporting innovative ventures, i.e., projects whose
     proposed solution to a relevant problem represents a new or improved product
     or   service,   with   a   national   scope   and,   additionally,   potential   for
     internationalisation. This instrument is supported by the Ministry of Economy
     through the Sustainable Productive Development Programme (DPS).


h. Innovation Challenges: This instrument seeks to provide a solution to a
     public interest challenge affecting a group of companies belonging to a
     productive sector and/or value chain. To this end, innovative, technology-based
     solutions are sought, with co-financing provided for activities such as technical
     and commercial validation, feasibility studies, protection strategy, and
     strengthening of scaling and commercialisation strategy, among others. In
     2024, a new call is expected to finance specific problems of the emerging
     hydrogen industry, such as integrating electrolysers with variable renewable
     energies, blending systems with other gases for distribution, and optimising
     materiality and inputs of electrolysers on a national scale. This instrument is
     supported by the Ministry of Economy through the Sustainable Productive
     Development Programme (DPS).


i.        Quality Promotion Programmes - Focal: This instrument allows
supporting companies to improve their productivity and competitiveness, through
an incentive for the implementation and certification of technical standards of
management systems and products, or protocols, recognised by CORFO as enabling
to access more sophisticated or export markets. This programme co-finances
consultancy and/or technical




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                   page 80
     assistance costs, including both obtaining certificates and the necessary
     implementation process.


j.   Subsidy for green hydrogen demand: CORFO will issue a call to provide
     direct subsidy to initiatives associated with the demand for green hydrogen in
     Chile, with an R&D component in the projects.


Timeline:      2023-2030 (annual and permanent process, depending on the

deadlines of each instrument)


Milestone:
•    2023-2030: Annual call for each CORFO instrument.


Responsible Institution:             CORFO, with support from the Ministry of

Economy, Development, and Tourism and the Ministry of Energy.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                 page 81
Action 13. Boost
domestic/national demand for
hydrogen in key sectors through
an Emissions Trading System
(ETS)


  Objective: Implement an Emissions Trading System based on a cap-and-trade
  framework in the energy sector to trigger domestic demand for hydrogen. A pilot
  programme will be developed to facilitate the replacement or use of new hydrogen-
  based technologies to decarbonise emissions-intensive sectors that currently face
  multiple challenges by setting cost-effective emission limits.


  This instrument promotes the execution of projects for the consumption of green
  hydrogen and its derivatives in the economy, as zero-emission alternatives for
  energy supply and as raw materials for various economic activities in the country.
  This pilot can be implemented to comply with the Climate Change Framework Law,
  which instructs the development of economic instruments for climate change
  management. The implementation of an ETS, along with a carbon tax, creates a
  conducive ecosystem for the adoption of decarbonisation technologies such as
  those provided by green hydrogen, as it increases efficiency in emission reduction
  by allowing companies to adapt their strategy to seize the opportunities offered by
  both approaches.


  Timeline: 2024-2025. Design – 2024-2025. Implementation – 2025 onwards.

  Milestones:

  •   2024: Design of an ETS pilot programme for the energy sector.


  •   2025: Implementation of an ETS pilot programme.


  Responsible Institution:




  Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                  page 82
 •   Ministry of Energy

 •   Ministry of Environment


 •   Ministry of Finance




Action 14. Create a fund for tax
credits attributable to first
category tax for investments with
high multiplier effect, including
the "green" dimension


 Objective:      Under the Income Tax Reform Law, part of the Fiscal Pact, a tax

 incentive will be created that companies developing productive investment projects
 promoting the transfer and development of new technologies and/or the
 decarbonisation of the productive matrix, such as electromobility, renewable energy
 industry, and green hydrogen, can opt for.


 Timeline: 2024-2025

 Milestones:

 •   2024: Submission of the bill to Congress.


 •   2025: Approval of the bill.


 Responsible Institution: Ministry of Finance.




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan               page 83
Action 15. Implement a
development tax rate for
investment, allowing companies
to reduce first category tax
through investments that
increase business productivity



 Objective: Under the Income Tax Reform Law, part of the Fiscal Pact, the first
 category tax will be reduced to 25%, and a 2% tax will be established for
 companies in the general taxation regime that can be deducted through
 investments that increase business productivity, such as the acquisition of high-
 tech equipment.

 The fiscal resources from this tax will be allocated to key activities related to
 decarbonisation strategies, adaptation to climate change, biodiversity protection,
 among others.


 Timeline: 2024-2025

 Milestones:

 •   2024: Submission of the bill to Congress.


 •   2025: Approval of the bill.


 Responsible Institution: Ministry of Finance.




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                    page 84
Action 16. Tax Incentive for
Research and Development,
through Strengthening of Law
20241 (R&D Law)

 Objective: Within the framework of the Income Tax Reform Law, part of the
 Fiscal Pact, the current Research and Development (R&D) Law will be prioritised for
 updating. This instrument offers an incentive of up to 35% tax credit against the First
 Category Tax on the amount invested in R&D, and the remaining 65% can be
 considered as necessary expense to generate income. Available throughout the year.

 In this regard, the R&D law will be strengthened by tripling its upper threshold for
 tax credit, and the tax credit amount for certain projects consistent with sustainable
 development, such as those related to green hydrogen and its derivatives, will be
 increased to 50%.


 Timeline: 2024-2025

 Milestones:

 •   2024: Submission of the bill to Congress.


 •   2025: Approval of the bill.


 Responsible Institutions: Ministry of Finance, with support from CORFO,
 Ministry of Economy, Development, and Tourism, and Ministry of Energy.




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                  page 85
Action 17. Update the "Green
Credit" instrument of CORFO to
include banking and non-
banking financial intermediaries,
to finance green hydrogen
projects


 Objective:       CORFO's "Green Credit" instrument provides financing for
 operations granted by banking and non-banking financial institutions to companies
 (through loans or leasing), for investments in the construction, operation, and
 commissioning of projects, initiatives, and/or measures in the field of sustainability.
 Currently, through this instrument, it is possible to finance projects in renewable
 energies, electromobility, energy efficiency, climate change, storage, and circular
 economy. Additionally, this credit will be available to finance additional projects
 related to green hydrogen and its derivatives.


 Timeline: 2024-2030

 Milestone:

 •   First half of 2024: Update and implementation.


 Responsible Institution: CORFO and Ministry of Economy, Development,
 and Tourism. Initiative developed with the support of the Ministry of Economy
 through the Sustainable Productive Development Programme (DPS).




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                  page 86
Action 18. Implement a financing
facility for green hydrogen
projects and its value chain, with
state backing and support from
multilateral banks



 Objective:       Through CORFO, a financial facility (Facility) will be established to
 catalyse private investment primarily by providing State backing to reduce and
 mitigate financial risks of projects that meet certain technical, economic,
 environmental, and social requirements. This instrument will finance projects in
 different stages of development, focusing on green hydrogen production (including
 renewable electricity generation and derivative production), demand for green
 hydrogen, and the acquisition of components for green hydrogen (such as wind
 turbine blades and towers, solar panels, electrolysers, etc.).

 As part of this facility, CORFO will develop an Environmental and Social Management
 System (ESMS). The ESMS is a system for assessing environmental and social risks,
 aimed at supporting the evaluation of associated risks to ensure that projects
 comply with high environmental and social standards, as well as related
 requirements demanded by international financial institutions. The ESMS should
 therefore be developed in coordination with all existing environmental and social
 institutions.

 The Facility will have an initial size of around US$1,000 million, largely financed by
 International Development Banks (IDB, World Bank, KfW, EIB, CAF, among others),
 in addition to CORFO's own resources. The preparation of this platform is ongoing,
 including the definition of standards required for applicant projects. It is expected
 to be operational from the second half of 2024.


 Timeline: 2023-2026




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                  page 87
Design and implementation: 2023-2025, with significant importance to support the
financing of hydrogen projects during 2025 and 2026, which will be developed
through a strategy that allows for the gradual availability of resources for this
purpose.


Milestones:
•   Third quarter 2024: Initiate work on prospecting for green credit placement,
    involving commercial, prospecting, and project structuring activities for
    potential financing.


•   September - October 2024: Establishment of the Hydrogen Guarantee Fund
    (GH2) where GH2 coverage will be provided for projects with financing under a
    "Structured Financing" modality.


•   End of 2024: Formal opening of the Facility GH2 Window with Green Credit and
    commencement of work with projects for financing from 2025 onwards


Responsible Institutions: CORFO,                  with the support of the Ministry of
Finance, Ministry of Energy, Ministry of Economy, Development and Tourism, and
Ministry of the Environment, among others.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                  page 88
Action 19. Support for green
hydrogen production and/or
consumption projects regarding
financing instruments


 Objective: Comprehensive and individualised Financial Service Assistance (FSA)
 for green hydrogen and derivative projects throughout the value chain to ensure
 their bankability and financial sustainability.


 The initiative is developed by the GIZ's RH2 programme and will involve supporting
 companies and green hydrogen projects with financial advisors specialising in
 renewable energy and hydrogen markets. It also includes the development of a
 public-private working group aimed at preparing a proposal to implement in Chile
 a financing model based on the H2Global12 mechanism, which enables investment
 and development of the green hydrogen industry considering mechanisms that
 promote competition to encourage timely and effective increase of clean
 technologies associated with the green hydrogen value chain, through the link
 between green hydrogen producers and demanders, by addressing the price gap
 between production and commercialisation existing today.

 To complement these objectives, the potential development and implementation of
 new, modified, or used financial instruments in international markets to support and
 enable the financing and investment of green hydrogen and derivatives projects are
 considered, under the current national legal financial framework, and considering
 the regulations established regarding information, environmental, social, and
 governance (ESG) criteria.



 12
   H2 Global: This corresponds to an instrument created in Germany with the
 aim of boosting the green hydrogen market. It consists essentially of
 compensating for the difference between supply and demand prices.
 Specifically, ten-year purchase agreements for hydrogen are made with
 producers before conducting auctions to sell the hydrogen and cover the
 price difference through a subsidy from the German government (resources
 whose origin may change in subsequent auctions).




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                page 89
Timeline: 2024-2030

FSA and working group, in development from 2024.


Milestones:

•   2024: Opening of the FSA call for proposals


•   2024: Commencement of public-private working group sessions


Responsible Institution: Ministry of Energy, with support from the GIZ
RH2 Programme.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan          page 90
Action 20. Accelerate the
implementation of the first
industrial projects of green
hydrogen and its derivatives
through financing rounds



      Objective: Support the construction and realisation of industrial-scale
      projects for green hydrogen and its derivatives through a subsidy that
      supports final investment decisions, and whose implementation allows for
      understanding the full costs of producing green hydrogen and its derivatives
      in Chile.


      This entails closing the process associated with the first call made during
      2021 and the possible opening of new calls that meet the objectives
      established in the National Green Hydrogen Strategy and the current Action
      Plan, in accordance with industry conditions, timing, and evaluation of the
      instrument.


      Development timeline: 2023-2026

      Milestones:
      •    2025: Closure of the first call for financing initiated in
           2021.


      •    2025-2030: Evaluation of opening new financing rounds


      Responsible Institution: CORFO.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                         page 91
 6.4 ENVIRONMENTAL
 MANAGEMENT
                  The development of the green hydrogen industry, its derivatives, and its
                 entire value chain will require the adaptation and installation of new
                 infrastructure in various territories of the country. Therefore, it will be
                 crucial to reinforce environmental management related to project
                 development to provide certainty and ensure harmony with the
                 environment.

                  In this regard, the State will work on different fronts to provide certainty
                 regarding the assessment of environmental impacts of projects. There will
                 be improvements in baseline information for project environmental
                 assessment, including the development of public environmental baseline
                 data. Additionally, progress will be made in updating and generating
                 technical criteria for the environmental assessment of different types of
                 projects related to the green hydrogen value chain in unregulated areas.


                  Below are the actions and milestones committed in this plan to support
                 the environmental management of green hydrogen and its derivatives
                 projects.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                         page 92
LINE OF ACTION 4:
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT

                             ACTIONS

 21. Develop public environmental baseline and monitoring proposals in
 prioritised regions


 22. Consolidate existing reference information in the Environmental Impact
 Assessment System (SEIA from its acronym in Spanish)


 23. Adopt international reference norms and/or standards in the absence
 of regulations and/or standards in the country



MILESTONES
             Magallanes public environmental baseline available on the               Study conducted by the end of 2024 to standardise SEIA reference
             Platform (with existing secondary information)                          information

             Launch of a technological platform with baseline and other              Document prepared with a selection of international reference norms
             information                                                             and standards
             Antofagasta public environmental baseline available on the              Analysis of applicability and standardisation applicable in
             Platform (existing secondary information)                               project evaluation
             Metropolitan Region public environmental baseline                      Commencement of the procedure to adopt norms into the
             available on the Platform (existing secondary                          national legal framework
             information)
             Magallanes public environmental baseline available on the
             Platform (with existing secondary information)                     Note: Bar colours only indicate complementarity of measures

            Antofagasta public environmental baseline developed and
            available on the Platform (primary information collected from the
            field)

             Magallanes public environmental baseline available on the
             Platform (with existing secondary information)




                          Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                             page 93
Action 21. Develop public
environmental baselines and
monitoring proposals in
prioritised regions


  Objective:      The objective is to build public environmental baselines and a

  proposal for a long-term monitoring network, facilitating environmental assessment
  processes in strategic sectors and standardising information in formats required by
  environmental institutional systems and platforms.

  This work will advance the standardisation of the contents that must be included in
  the baselines of investment projects to complement what is required by
  environmental regulations in environmental impact assessment processes.


  The scope of the action will be the construction of a system for developing public
  baseline data that will provide information on the current quantity and quality of
  terrestrial and marine ecosystems.


  The Ministry of the Environment has already started developing public
  environmental baselines in the Magallanes and Chilean Antarctic Region. It is
  expected to start developing baselines in other regions, prioritising those where the
  highest volume of projects is projected to be submitted in the short term, such as
  the Antofagasta and Metropolitan regions.


  To centralise and make this information available, a technological platform for
  baseline data will be developed as part of the architecture of the National
  Environmental Information System (SINIA from its acronym in Spanish), which will
  also integrate data from the Pollutant Release and Transfer Register (RETC from its
  acronym in Spanish) to centralise the country's environmental information in a
  modern and easily updatable manner, as well as other sources of relevant
  information.


  Timeline: 2023-2026

  Milestones:




  Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                 page 94
•   Mid-2024: Magallanes public environmental baseline available on the platform
    (existing secondary information).


•   Second half of 2024: Launch of a technological platform with baseline and other
    information


•   Mid-2025: Antofagasta public environmental baseline available on the platform
    (existing secondary information).


•   Mid-2025: Metropolitan Region public environmental baseline available on the
    platform (existing secondary information).


•   End of 2025: Magallanes baseline developed and available on the platform
    (primary information collected from the field).


•   End of 2026: Antofagasta public environmental baseline developed and
    available on the platform (primary information collected from the field).


•   End of 2026: Metropolitan Region baseline developed and available on the

    platform (primary information collected from the field).


Responsible Institutions: Ministry of the Environment and Ministry of
Economy, Development, and Tourism, with support from the Sustainable Productive
Development Programme (DPS).




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                page 95
Action 22. Consolidate existing
reference information in the
Environmental Impact
Assessment System (SEIA)


 Objective:       Compile and standardise existing environmental reference

 information in the Environmental Impact Assessment System (SEIA from its acronym
 in Spanish), valuing the information present in environmental impact studies
 conducted, which will serve as a reference for future processes.

 The Environmental Assessment Service will generate an information system of
 baseline data for the various relevant environmental components that arise in the
 environmental impact assessment process of projects submitted to the SEIA, based
 on the development of a study for this purpose.


 Timeline: 2024-2028

 Milestone:

 •   End of 2024: Study conducted to standardise reference information from the
     SEIA.

 Responsible Institution: Environmental Evaluation Service.




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                page 96
Action 23. Adopt international
reference norms in the absence
of regulations in the country for
project environmental
assessment


 Objective: Select       international standards and/or regulations for aspects not

 regulated and considered relevant in the construction and operation of the industry
 and its sustainable management and apply them until they are replaced by national
 regulations.

       To achieve this, the following aspects need to be developed:


       Selection of international reference norms: A list with criteria for the use of
       international norms will be prepared, prioritising those most validated within
       the framework of environmental impact assessment of projects.


       Analysis of the applicability of the selected norms or standards, justifying
       their compatibility based on standardisation and verifiable uniformity in
       project evaluation.


       According to the applicability of the measures adopted, the process of
       formulating standards for priority aspects considered fundamental for the
       sustainable development of the green hydrogen industry will begin.


 Timeline: 2025-2027

 Milestones:

       •   First half of 2025: Document with criteria for the use of reference norms
           within the Environmental Impact Assessment System.


       •   End of 2026: Analysis of applicability and standardisation for project
           evaluation.




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                       page 97
       •   End of 2027: Initiation of the procedure for adopting standards into the
            national legal framework.


       Responsible Institutions: Environmental Evaluation Service, Ministry of
       the Environment, and Ministry of Energy.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                      page 98
 6.5 INDUSTRY
 SUSTAINABILITY

                  In this line of action, the aim is to have appropriate and consistent
                 sustainability standards applied to the industry for the future, positioning
                 the industry as an example and laying the groundwork for a proper
                 relationship with local communities.


                  Clearly defining these standards, their monitoring, as well as promoting
                 mechanisms to address concerns of local communities early on, is key to
                 achieving lasting decisions in territories, seeking, in turn, continuous
                 improvement of the industry through the adoption of cleaner
                 technologies and strategies.


                  Below are the actions and milestones committed in this Plan to promote
                 the sustainability of the green hydrogen and derivatives industry.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                        page 99
LINE OF ACTION 5:
INDUSTRY SUSTAINABILITY

                                 ACTIONS

24. Identify and analyse impacts along the green hydrogen and
derivatives value chain.


25. Promote circular economy standards.


26. Define and monitor sustainability standards.


27. Promote early participation in territories.




     MILESTONES
           Published study on the identification of socioeconomic           Document outlining key performance indicators for the green
           impacts derived from renewable hydrogen projects in              hydrogen industry, derivatives, and its value chain.
           Chile.

           Publicly available study on life cycle analysis of the green     At least two projects have initiated the early participation
           hydrogen industry, derivatives, and its value chain.             process.

                                                                            At least two projects have completed their early
           Guide on best practices in circular economy associated           participation processes.
           with the green hydrogen and derivatives industry and value
           chain.

           Identification of critical processes in the green hydrogen
                                                                            Note: Bar colours only
                                                                            indicate complementarity of
           value chain.
                                                                            measures.




                          Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                         page 100
Action 24. Identify and analyse
impacts along the green
hydrogen and derivatives value
chain


 Objective:       Identify the environmental and socioeconomic impacts of the

 industry and its value chain, in areas such as resource use, waste, biodiversity, social
 and cultural components, or infrastructure, seeking continuous improvement of the
 industry, with emphasis on the particular characteristics of the territories where the
 industry will be located. These analyses will serve as input for actions related to
 promoting circular economy and sustainability standards.


 Timeline: 2024-2027

 Milestones:

 •   Second half of 2024: Published study on the identification of socioeconomic
     impacts derived from renewable hydrogen projects in Chile.


 •   End of 2026: Publicly available study on life cycle analysis of the green
     hydrogen industry, derivatives, and its value chain.


 Responsible Institution: Ministry of Energy.




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                   page 101
Action 25. Promote circular
economy standards


       Objective:       Promote comprehensive waste management, including

       valorisation and disposal through circular economy agreements, plans, or
       programmes between private entities in areas where the industry develops,
       thus leveraging production chains. Mechanisms such as clean production
       agreements will be encouraged. Critical waste points will be identified
       through a life cycle analysis study to drive this measure.


       Timeline: 2024-2026

       Milestone:

       •   End of 2026: Guide on best practices in circular economy associated with
           the green hydrogen and derivatives industry and value chain.


       Responsible Institution: Ministry of the Environment, Ministry of
       Energy, and Ministry of Health.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                      page 102
Action 26. Define and monitor
sustainability standards



  Objective:      Based on the identification of critical points from the life cycle
  analysis and socioeconomic impacts, standards with key performance indicators will
  be defined to monitor projects in environmental, social, and economic areas. To
  ensure verification, these indicators will be built with public data, including already
  available open data from sources such as the Pollutant Release and Transfer
  Register, the National Environmental Inspection Information System, the
  Environmental Impact Assessment System, among others.

  Sustainability standards may be implemented through public-private-civil society
  agreements under regional roadmaps and will serve as a basis for progressively
  strengthening institutions and regulations in these areas.


  Timeline: 2027-2030

  Milestones:

  •   2024: Identification of critical processes in the green hydrogen value
      chain.


  •   End of 2026: Document with definition of key performance indicators for the
      green hydrogen industry, derivatives, and its value chain. These indicators will
      be discussed in civic workshops.


  Responsible Institutions:                 Ministry   of   Energy,   Ministry   of   the

  Environment, Ministry of Social Development and Family, and Ministry of Labour
  and Social Welfare.




  Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                  page 103
Action 27. Promote early
participation in the territories


  Objective:      Provide project developers with tools to involve interested

  communities early in project design, providing methodological support and
  accompaniment in multi-stakeholder dialogue processes, and promoting the
  adoption of participation and human rights standards. Through this action, we aim
  for high socio-environmental standards to be sought out by companies, providing
  facilitation and monitoring of the agreements reached. It also aims to generate
  harmonious, constructive long-term relationships between companies, local
  communities, and other interested parties to minimise impacts, prevent and/or
  resolve conflicts, provide information on potential environmental impacts, and
  legitimise the decisions made.

  In November 2023, the Environmental Assessment Service of Chile (SEA from its
  acronym in Spanish) published a guiding document on Early Civic Participation (PCT
  from its acronym in Spanish). The main objective of the guide is to unify minimum
  criteria for planning and implementing PCT processes, enhancing trust among the
  involved actors and strengthening projects or activities entering the SEIA process.


  Currently, there are various State instruments available to project developers that
  provide methodologies for early involvement of interested communities. The
  Ministry of Energy, through the Participation and Social Dialogue Division, promotes
  stakeholder participation in GH2 projects and derivatives throughout their life cycle
  and, for this purpose, provides methodological support and accompaniment in
  multi-stakeholder dialogue processes to promote the adoption of participation and
  human rights standards and associativity. In addition, the Sustainability and Climate
  Change Agency (ASCC from its acronym in Spanish) has the Voluntary Early
  Participation Agreement (AVPT from its acronym in Spanish) instrument, which seeks
  to adopt high socio-environmental standards by companies. The Agency
  administers and guides the process, provides facilitation, and monitors the
  agreements reached.




  Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                 page 104
Through methodologies like these, agreements are promoted among different
stakeholders, which can later be formalised in the environmental assessment
process. Moreover, if there is interest among the various actors related to GH2 in
the regions, voluntary social and environmental standards could be developed, with
a territorial scope, shared by the entire industry.


Timeline: From 2024.

Milestones:

•   2024: At least two projects have started early participation
    processes.


•   2026: At least two projects have completed their early participation
    processes.


Responsible Institution: Ministry               of Energy, Sustainability and Climate

Change Agency (ASCC), or Environmental Assessment Service (SEA), as appropriate.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                  page 105
 6.6 REGULATORY
 ENABLEMENT

       The green hydrogen industry requires regulations and norms that provide legal
       certainty to facilitate its deployment. Establishing a regulatory framework for the
       deployment of green hydrogen and its derivatives is crucial to safeguard aspects of
       safety throughout the value chain.

       In 2020, under the framework of the Green Hydrogen Strategy, a first work plan for
       the regulation and norms of green hydrogen was developed. However, given the
       advances in the industry and new available information, it is necessary to update
       this work plan so that it is harmonious with current development perspectives, in
       addition to considering regulation for other aspects of the value chain, such as
       desalination.

       In this context, a new version of the regulatory work plan is proposed for the
       creation of an appropriate, clear, and timely normative framework that guarantees
       high standards of safety and defines clear rules for the execution of hydrogen
       projects and its value chain. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the regulations to be
       developed consider transitional articles applicable to projects that are being
       developed or have been installed under the current normative framework. The
       elaboration of this work plan incorporated a process of public-private feedback, a
       regulatory impact report for each elaboration or modification considered, and a
       public consultation process.

       This line of action includes the following actions and milestones, aiming to generate
       conditions of certainty and stability in regulatory matters, facilitating the installation
       of the industry and the materialisation of projects of various scales.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                           page 106
 LINE OF ACTION 6:
 REGULATORY ENABLEMENT

                               ACTIONS

  28. Launch and implement the enabling regulatory work plan for the
  industry


 29. Promote specific and enabling regulation for seawater
 desalination



MILESTONES
                                                                            Note: Bar colours only indicate complementarity of
           Launch of the Regulatory Work Plan                               measures.

           Registration of the Hydrogen Installation Safety Regulation


          Initiation of a study to generate a proposal for hydrogen
          quality regulation and hydrogen refuelling station
          regulations

          Presentation of the regulatory strategy
          for hydrogen derivatives

           Update of the regulatory work plan

           Advocacy for a bill on seawater desalination for publication




                         Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan   page 107
Action 28. Launch and
implement the enabling
regulatory work plan for the
hydrogen and derivatives
industry

  Objective: According to the regulatory work plan developed in 2023 under the
  leadership of the Ministries of Energy and Economy, in coordination with the
  Ministries of Transport and Telecommunications, Health, and Mining, each ministry
  or competent authority will be responsible for drafting or amending the respective
  regulations. A schedule of execution for critical regulations identified until 2030 has
  been defined.

  In particular, this regulatory work plan addresses regulations associated with
  hydrogen installations, transportation, hydrogen usage applications, quality aspects,
  commercialisation, among others. The first regulations to be developed will focus
  on the safety of installations, fuelling stations, hydrogen quality specifications,
  freight transportation in its various modes, among others. Additionally, this plan
  includes a review every 3 years to prioritise and address the industry's development
  and maturity.


  For the implementation of this work plan, the development of studies and
  guidelines, training, and technical support for the preparation and updating of
  regulations are considered.


  Timeline: 2024-2030

  Milestones:

  •   Second half of 2024: Launch of the plan.


  •   2024: Regulation on Hydrogen Installation Safety.


  •   2024: Initiation of studies to generate proposals for hydrogen quality
      regulation and hydrogen fuelling station regulations.




  Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                  page 108
•   2025: Presentation of the regulatory strategy for hydrogen derivatives,
    which will begin development during 2024.


•   2027: Update of the regulatory work plan.


Responsible Institution:              Ministry of Energy in coordination with the

Ministry of Transport and Telecommunications, Ministry of Mining, Ministry of
Health, and other relevant public services responsible for each regulation. Initiative
developed with the support of the Ministry of Economy through the Sustainable
Productive Development Programme (DPS).




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                 page 109
Action 29. Promote specific and
enabling regulation for seawater
desalination

 Objective:       Establish a clear and unified regulatory framework and

 administrative procedures, legally enabling the Ministry of Public Works to provide
 or concession, multipurpose infrastructure that includes industrial use and shared
 use by projects, such as green hydrogen production and its derivatives in a planned
 manner, optimising the water resource, and in accordance with available studies—
 including those related to brine.

 The aim is to promote the use of desalinated water and/or water reuse for activities
 such as industrial use, thereby contributing to safeguarding and prioritising the use
 of continental water sources for human consumption.


 Timeline: 2024-2025

 Milestone:

 2024-2025: Advocate for the publication of the Law on the Use of Seawater for
 Desalination


 Responsible Institution: Ministry             of Public Works, with the support of

 various related agencies.




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                 page 110
 6.7 PERMITTING SYSTEM

                  Our country's aspiration to lead in the green hydrogen industry
                  internationally imposes the need to enable the market in a timely
                  manner, with an agile and efficient permit acquisition protocol, without
                  relaxing the requirements. However, some stakeholders estimate that the
                  processing of such projects may take up to ten years under the current
                  regulations, including the environmental evaluation process.

                  On the one hand, there is a challenge for public institutions, as this is a
                  new industry with some processes different from those that have been
                  evaluated so far. While some projects that make up the extensive green
                  hydrogen value chain and derivatives already exist in our regulations and
                  the new components (such as hydrogen production itself) are only part
                  of the chain, the challenge arises from the scale of the projects and the
                  combination of them into a complex value chain. Public institutions will
                  need to address this challenge to streamline certain evaluation or
                  permitting processes.

                  On the other hand, there is a challenge for the permit processing and
                  delivery system, which is not designed and optimised for the current
                  reality, resulting in lengthy processing times, generating uncertainty. This
                  poses a challenge for the timely development of green hydrogen projects
                  in the country.


                  The above reveals significant gaps for speeding up permits considering
                  aspects such as: lack of knowledge of the processes involved in the
                  industry and the value chain, lack of human capital for evaluation and
                  permitting, lack of appropriate techniques and methodologies to
                  evaluate the impact of these projects, and identifying improvable aspects
                  of the permit processing processes in order to reduce their timelines.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                         page 111
                  It is important to highlight, in this context, that the Office of Large
                  Projects and the Division of Sustainable Productive Development, of the
                  Ministry of Economy, Development and Tourism, and the Division of
                  Sustainable Energy Infrastructure, of the Ministry of Energy, jointly and
                  with close public-public coordination, offer a coordination instance
                  between different institutions of the State administration linked to the
                  granting of authorisations and permits for energy projects. These teams
                  are also responsible for actively monitoring the development of green
                  hydrogen projects and their derivatives, such as ammonia and methanol,
                  among others in the value chain.

                  This particular line of action consists of the following actions and
                  milestones listed below.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                       page 112
 LINE OF ACTION 7:
 PERMITTING SYSTEM

                                ACTIONS

  30. Strengthen the services that grant critical permits for the proper
  development of the industry and establish an implementation route with a
  regional focus.


  31. Promote comprehensive reform of sectoral permits.


  32. Update the guide for the submission of hydrogen projects to the
  Superintendency of Electricity and Fuels (SEC).


  33. Develop and establish technical criteria for the environmental
  assessment of different types of projects related to the green hydrogen and
  derivatives value chain.

 34. Strengthen the Environmental Assessment Service (SEA) and those
 services involved in the environmental assessment process.




MILESTONES

           Services linked are trained

           Bill is submitted
           Bill is approved

           Update of the guide is published

           Technical criteria are published

           Projection of staffing strengthening requirements

           Progressive implementation of strengthening and modernisation of services

           Services are trained in strategic regions




                          Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan              page 113
Action 30. Strengthen the
services that issue critical
permits for the proper
development of a green
hydrogen industry in Chile and
establish an implementation
route with a regional focus

 Objective:       The aim of the plan to reinforce the organs of the State

 administration that issue critical permits is to solve problems related to the agility
 of permit processing while the bill to reform sectoral permit processing, led by the
 Ministry of Economy, is approved.

 The reinforcement considered the following actions: (1) hiring personnel for file
 evaluation; (2) technical training on green hydrogen projects; (3) technical support
 for developing guides, admissibility review guidelines, and evaluation; and (4)
 external technical support through resource transfer agreements between
 institutions.

 Currently, the Ministry of Economy, through the DPS programme, is supporting the
 reinforcement of services in the Magallanes region.


 Timeline: 2023-2025

 Milestone:

 •    2024: Related services are trained, especially in regions where the green
      hydrogen industry will be developed.


 Responsible Institution: Ministry of Economy, Development and
 Tourism, in coordination with the Ministry of Energy and related services. The
 initiative is supported by the Sustainable Productive Development Programme
 (DPS).




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                 page 114
   Action 31. Promote
   comprehensive reform of
   sectoral permits

       Objective: The         bill entitled "Framework Law for Sectoral Authorisations" will

       improve the standardisation, efficiency, proportionality, predictability, and
       institutional framework of permits for investments, aiming to reduce authorisation
       deadlines for projects by 30%.


       The reform includes a framework law for sectoral authorisations. For the purposes
       of this law, sectoral authorisations will be classified, according to their purpose, into
       the following types:


       a. Administration or disposal authorisation: administrative act that enables the
            exploitation or development of public interest services or the use, enjoyment,
            or disposal of State or national public use assets.


       b. Location authorisation: administrative act approving the location of a project or
            activity.


       c. Project authorisation: administrative act approving the design or programme of
            a project or activity, prior to its construction, installation, development, or
            execution.


       d. Operation authorisation: administrative act approving the operation of a project
            or activity.


       e. Professional or service authorisation: administrative act enabling individuals,
            companies, or teams to carry out an activity or provide a service.


       f.   Other authorisations: administrative acts enabling the development or
            execution of a project or activity not covered by the above types.


       Also, a Unified Permit Information System is included through unique forms
       provided by the sectoral body for each authorisation within its competence. These
       forms must be available in the Unified Sectoral Permit Information System aimed at




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                           page 115
streamlining and simplifying administrative processes for obtaining permits.


It is important to note that all authorisations granted under the Environmental
Impact Assessment System (SEIA from its acronym in Spanish) are excluded, as well
as the pronouncements issued by sectoral bodies regarding environmental sectoral
permits within said system.


Timeline: 2023-2026

Milestones:

•   January 2024: Bill is submitted.


•   First quarter of 2026: Bill is approved.


Responsible Institution: Ministry of Economy, Development and
Tourism.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan               page 116
Action 32. Update the guide for
the submission of hydrogen
projects to the Superintendency
of Electricity and Fuels (SEC)



 Objective:       Update the current guide to incorporate the experience of the

 Superintendency as well as actors who have submitted projects previously, with the
 aim of improving information delivery, clarifying parts of the process associated with
 registration, and requesting clearer information from stakeholders to facilitate the
 evaluation process and make associated times more efficient.


 Timeline: 2023-2024

 Milestones:

 •   End of 2024: Update of the special hydrogen project submission guide is
     published.


 •   Responsible Institution: Superintendency of Electricity and Fuels, with support
     from the Ministry of Energy.




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                 page 117
 Action 33. Develop and establish
 technical criteria for the
 environmental assessment of
 different types of projects related
 to the green hydrogen and
 derivatives value chain


       Objective:       Update and generate technical criteria for the environmental

       assessment of different types of projects related to the green hydrogen value chain.
       For this purpose, various public bodies will co-ordinately develop guides,
       instructions, and criteria for the environmental assessment of projects in the
       Environmental Impact Assessment System related to green hydrogen and its value
       chain13.

       Initially, studies will be conducted to determine the gap and subsequently evaluate
       how to address it within the environmental assessment process.


       Timeline: 2024-2026

       Milestone:

       • End of 2026: Publication of technical criteria

       Responsible Institution: Environmental Evaluation Service.




       13
         For example, the Environmental Guide for Birds within the framework of the
       Renewable Hydrogen TEI Project by GIZ.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                       page 118
Action 34. Strengthen the
Environmental Assessment
Service and those services
involved in the environmental
assessment process to address
green hydrogen projects


 Objective: This measure includes, on the one hand, increasing staffing at the
 Environmental Assessment Service (SEA) at the national and regional levels to better
 address the evaluation of projects the size of green hydrogen, complementary to
 the strengthening of institutions that issue critical permits.

 On the other hand, intensive training will be provided to green hydrogen project
 evaluators at the SEA in regions and professionals from Regional Ministerial
 Secretariats and other public services that may require it, in order to strengthen skills
 and knowledge in areas of the green hydrogen value chain.


 Timeline: 2024-2030

 Milestones:

 •   2025: Projection of staffing strengthening and modernisation
     requirements for services associated with project evaluation.


 •   2025-2030: Progressive implementation of strengthening and modernisation
     of services.


 •   End of 2026: Services are trained in strategic regions.




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                    page 119
       Responsible Institution:                Environmental Assessment Service (SEA) and

       Ministry of Energy, with support from the Spanish Agency for International
       Development Cooperation (AECID) for the development of training for SEA
       personnel.




 6.8 COMPATIBILITY AND
 TERRITORIAL
 INTEGRATION FOR
 PROJECTS
                    The development of the green hydrogen industry and its derivatives
                    poses challenges in terms of territorial integration and deployment, in
                    line with the particularities of each territory and the need for synergies
                    between the different components of its value chain. Therefore, it is
                    necessary to address this at the regulatory level to provide certainty for
                    current project development, and instrumentally through territorial
                    planning, management, and organisation, as well as through territorial-
                    focused energy planning.

                    Firstly, and considering that this is a new industry for the country and the
                    recent advances in regulatory matters, the aim is to progress in providing
                    regulatory certainty regarding siting, addressing the land uses applicable
                    to green hydrogen projects, their derivatives, and their value chain, as
                    well as regarding their industrial qualification, regulation that must also
                    be incorporated into the corresponding instruments.

                    In this regard, it is also proposed to work on the consideration of green
                    hydrogen, its derivatives, and its value chain in the development of inter-
                    communal and communal territorial planning instruments, in accordance
                    with current regulations, all of which are subject to the Strategic
                    Environmental Assessment (SEA) procedure, taking into account the
                    requirements of this industry. Thus, within the framework of the SEA,
                    among other aspects, the instruments must consider environmental and
                    sustainability policies that impact the instrument, and environmental
                    considerations for sustainable development related to mitigation and




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                           page 120
                 adaptation to climate change according to Article 43 of the Climate
                 Change Framework Law. It also considers coordination with key State
                 Administration bodies and community representatives essential for the
                 process.

                 Additionally, the aim is to address green hydrogen and its derivatives in
                 territorial-focused energy planning, which serves as input for sectoral
                 decision-making, for other services that plan and intervene in the
                 territory, and as a basis for an intentional management of public lands
                 that allows for a coordinated and compatible allocation of lands and
                 easements necessary.

                 The following are the actions and milestones aimed at ensuring the
                 compatibility and integration of green hydrogen projects, derivatives,
                 and their entire value chain.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                      page 121
LINE OF ACTION 8:
COMPATIBILITY AND TERRITORIAL INTEGRATION FOR PROJECTS
                             ACTIONS

35. Update regulations regarding territorial compatibility affecting
the green hydrogen industry in Chile

36. Incorporate green hydrogen and its derivatives and value chain
into matters to be considered in existing or under development
Territorial Planning Instruments (IPT from its acronym in Spanish)
and Territorial Planning Instruments (IOT from its acronym in
Spanish)
37. Develop territorial-focused energy planning instruments
focused on regions projected to host green hydrogen and its
derivatives projects


38. Develop master plans for industrial areas where green
hydrogen projects and their value chain will be concentrated                                                 16        17




MILESTONES
       Update Circular NTB32/D4 of 2020 - Instruct                     Registration of PROT Regulation                      PEER Publication
       technical criteria for the qualification of productive                                                               Antofagasta with EAE
       activities and infrastructure
                                                                       Working group on IPT for areas with projected
      MINVU DDU Circular on land use applicable to                                                                          PEER Publication Valparaíso
                                                                       development of the GH2 industry and its
      desalination projects for industrial use
                                                                       derivatives
                                                                                                                            Evaluate application areas
      Methodological design study for the development of               Zoning of the coastal edge of the Magallanes
      Energy Infrastructure Studies" of IPTs                           Region
                                                                                                                            Begin development of the first
       Base study for the update of the OGUC regarding                 PROT Methodological Guide                            Master Plan
       Energy Infrastructure
       Update of the General Ordinance of Urbanism and                  PELP Decree with Tocopilla and Antofagasta PGE
       Construction regarding energy infrastructure
                                                                       Publication of PEER Magallanes with EAE
      Modification of MINVU DDU Circular No. 481
      instructing on the methodology for Energy                            Publication of PEER Biobío
      Infrastructure Studies in IPTs




                       Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                                      page 122
Action 35. Update regulations
regarding territorial
compatibility affecting the green
hydrogen industry in Chile



      Objective: This action focuses on the scope defined by the General Ordinance
      of Urbanism and Construction, aiming to update the treatment of components of
      the green hydrogen industry and its derivatives. This update should provide greater
      certainty for project development and establish a clear regulatory framework for
      territorial planning instruments.

      In the short term, the goal is to conduct a detailed analysis of the variables and
      technical criteria to be considered in the industrial classification of projects
      (harmless, annoying, dangerous), in accordance with the provisions of Article 4.14.2
      of the General Ordinance of Urbanism and Construction (OGUC from its acronym in
      Spanish). This analysis will specifically focus on the application of Circular No. B32/04
      of 2020 issued by the Sub secretariat of Public Health. If necessary, this circular will
      be reviewed and updated to ensure alignment with current standards and
      requirements.

      Within the framework of the General Ordinance of Urbanism and Construction
      (OGUC), the aim is to ensure coherence in defining energy infrastructure in line with
      sectoral energy regulations. This involves reviewing the treatment of energy
      infrastructure and its value chain in accordance with the nature of this industry. The
      objective is to provide clarity regarding land use and other applicable urban
      planning regulations, both at the regulatory level and through circulars as stipulated
      in Article 4 of the General Law of Urbanism and Construction (LGUC from its
      acronym in Spanish). Additionally, it is identified as relevant to review and, if
      necessary, refine the methodology of the Technical Study of Energy Infrastructure
      required by the General Law of Urbanism and Construction (LGUC) and the General
      Ordinance of Urbanism and Construction (OGUC) for communal and intercommunal
      level territorial planning instruments. This aims to ensure that the challenges of this
      industry are adequately considered in these instruments, while also ensuring
      consistency with sectoral policies in the field.

Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                          page 123
      Timeline: 2025-2026

      Milestones:

      •   2025: Update Circular No. B32/04 of 2020 instructing technical criteria
          for the qualification of productive activities and infrastructure.


      •   2025: MINVU DDU Circular on land use applicable to desalination
          projects.


      •   2025: Methodological design study for the development of "Energy
          Infrastructure Studies" of Territorial Planning Instruments.


      •   2025: Base study for the update of the General Ordinance of
          Urbanism and Construction regarding energy infrastructure.


      •   2026: Update of the General Ordinance of Urbanism and Construction
          regarding energy infrastructure.


      •   2026: Modification of MINVU DDU Circular No. 481 instructing on the
          methodology for developing Energy Infrastructure Studies in Territorial
          Planning Instruments.


     Responsible Institution: Ministry of Housing and Urban Planning, Ministry
     of Health, with support from the Ministry of Public Works and Ministry of Energy.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                          page 124
Action 36. Incorporate green
hydrogen and its derivatives, as
well as components of its value
chain, into matters to be
considered in existing or under
development territorial planning
and zoning instruments


      Objective:       To integrate green hydrogen and its derivatives, as well as

     components of its value chain, into territorial planning and zoning to achieve their
     balanced integration with the various uses, interests, and sensitivities in the territory,
     with a focus on those municipalities and regions crucial for industry development.

      This will be achieved through the updating, modification, or creation of instruments,
     including their inclusion as subjects for analysis in the Energy Infrastructure Study
     (DDU MINVU Circular No. 481) in the case of urban planning, the Strategic
     Environmental Assessment procedure, and/or working groups with relevant
     organisations. All of this will be within the specific objectives of each instrument, and
     in accordance with principles such as sustainability, territorial cohesion, energy
     efficiency, and efficient and mixed use of land (LGUC), as well as territorial diversity,
     productive dynamism, and territorial competitiveness (PROT from its acronym in
     Spanish).

      In this context, the focus criteria refer to (1) instruments under development, (2) new
     instruments in areas projected for the development of the green hydrogen industry,
     and (3) energy transition zones with potential for productive conversion along these
     lines.


      Regarding instruments under development, initial focus lies on the Intercommunal
     Coastal Border Regulatory Plan of Antofagasta (PRIBCA from its acronym in Spanish),
     Metropolitan Regulatory Plan of Valparaíso (PREMVAL from its acronym in Spanish),
     Metropolitan Regulatory Plan of Concepción (PRMC from its acronym in Spanish),
     the Zoning of Coastal Border of Magallanes, and the Communal Regulatory Plan of
     Mejillones. As for future instruments, initial focus lies on the Regional Territorial




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                         page 125
     Planning Plans (PROT) in the regions of Antofagasta, Valparaíso, Biobío, and
     Magallanes, as well as the Zoning of Coastal Border (ZUBC from its acronym in
     Spanish) in the regions of Antofagasta, Valparaíso, and Biobío, and the Communal
     Regulatory Plan of Taltal. Finally, regarding transition zones, the Communal
     Regulatory Plan of Tocopilla is considered relevant.


      Timeline: 2023-2026

      Milestones:

     •    2024: Approval of the PROT Regulation.


     •    2024: Working group on Territorial Planning Instruments for areas
          projected for the development of the GH2 industry and its derivatives.


     •    2025: Zoning of Coastal Border in Magallanes.


     •    2025: Methodological Guide for PROT.


      Responsible Institution:              Ministry of Housing and Urban Planning

     (MINVU from its acronym in Spanish), Regional Governments, MINVU Ministerial
     Secretariats and Municipalities. Interministerial Commission on Urban Development,
     Housing, and Territory (COMICIVYT from its acronym in Spanish), and Ministry of the
     Interior.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                    page 126
Action 37. Develop energy
planning instruments with a
territorial focus in regions
projected to host green hydrogen
production and/or consumption
projects and their derivatives



      Objective: To guide the energy development of regions projected to host green
      hydrogen production and/or consumption projects and their derivatives, with a
      territorial focus, to promote balanced integration of the industry and its value chain
      in the territory and to accommodate the renewable energies necessary for the
      industry. This will be achieved through Energy Strategic Plans (PEER from its
      acronym in Spanish) and Electric Power Generation Development Centres (PDGE
      from its acronym in Spanish), instruments that consider the best available official
      information and an interdisciplinary approach, seeking articulation and feedback
      with territorial planning and zoning instruments, according to their respective scales
      of intervention.


      Priority is initially given to the development of these plans in at least the Magallanes
      region (already initiated) and Antofagasta with Strategic Environmental Assessment
      and in the Valparaíso and Biobío regions. Additionally, priority is given to the Long-
      Term Energy Plan (PELP) Decree incorporating PDGE in the provinces of Tocopilla
      and Antofagasta.


      Timeline: 2024-2027

      Milestones:
      •   2024: PELP Decree with PDGE for Tocopilla and Antofagasta.


      •   2024: Publication of PEER for Magallanes with Strategic Environmental
          Assessment.


      •   2025: Publication of PEER for Biobío.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                         page 127
  •   2026: Publication of PEER for Antofagasta with Strategic Environmental
      Assessment.


  •   2027: Publication of PEER for Valparaíso.


  Responsible Institution: Ministry of Energy.




Action 38. Develop master plans
for industrial areas where green
hydrogen projects and their
value chain will be concentrated

  Objective:       To organise, transform, and improve the areas where green

  hydrogen projects and their derivatives, along with their value chain, will be
  concentrated, through a master plan for green hydrogen industrial areas, designed
  from scratch or by transforming existing ones, so that industrial development goes
  hand in hand with urban development in accordance with the standards established
  by national and international policy frameworks.

  These plans should promote sustainable territorial integration of the industry's value
  chain (minimising environmental and territorial externalities, generating interface or
  buffer zones with other uses and activities, and contributing to urban development
  in the neighbourhood and its surroundings), the use of shared infrastructure
  (pipelines, ports, desalination, storage, conditioning, energy, etc.), public-private and
  private-private collaboration, productive chaining, and the minimisation of risks and
  uncertainties for public and private projects.


  To achieve this, an industrial neighbourhood zoning will be designed, considering
  urbanisation, connectivity with the existing urban fabric (Article 5.2.6 OGUC), design
  of public spaces and facilities, among others, in accordance with territorial planning,
  planning, and management instruments, regarding matters such as the existence of




  Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                    page 128
      preferred location areas and location conditions of the Regional Territorial Planning
     Plans (PROT), rules, declarations of public utility, contributions to public space, and
     urban planning incentives of territorial planning instruments, and servitudes of
     state-owned lands. Additionally, references to international standards in the field will
     be evaluated, such as the Green Hydrogen Industrial Clusters Guidelines (ONUDI,
     2023), and ISO standards for sustainable cities. Finally, this plan must include a
     portfolio of intersectoral and private investment that allows timely and orderly
     implementation.


      These plans should be led by Municipalities with the support of Regional
     Governments and collaboration with companies, both in their design and in their
     financing and implementation, under the regional governance framework defined.


      Timeline: 2026-2030

      Milestones:

     •    2025: Evaluate application areas.


     •    2026-2030: Begin design and develop the first Master Plan.


      Responsible Institution:                Municipalities, Regional Governments, and

     Companies, in coordination with sectoral Ministries, especially the Ministry of
     National Assets, where state-owned lands are available.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                        page 129
 6.9 ENABLING
 INFRASTRUCTURE
 DEVELOPMENT

                  The green hydrogen industry and its derivatives offer us the opportunity
                  to once again be a country that invests in infrastructure as a driver of
                  economic growth and development. The value chain of this industry is
                  broad and entails various challenges related to the availability of
                  opportunities, the efficient and sustainable use of infrastructure and land,
                  along with the coordination and cooperation of public and private
                  stakeholders. This should be reflected in the need for logistical and
                  systemic approaches to its conception, possibilities for the use of existing
                  infrastructure and already industrialised lands. In addition to sharing key
                  infrastructure to leverage economies of scale, incorporating sustainability
                  standards into its design and operation, considering the territorial
                  diversity and cultural identity of the places where it is desired to be
                  located, among other factors.

                  To achieve sufficient and timely infrastructure, strategies are proposed
                  where the State transitions from a coordinating and facilitating role to
                  direct execution of some necessary investments, in cooperation and/or
                  complement to private initiatives, all within the framework of
                  intersectoral planning and existing territorial planning instruments.


                  In those regions where greater development of green hydrogen projects
                  and derivatives is envisaged, it is proposed to strengthen the role of the
                  State as a coordinator and facilitator of orderly, efficient, and sustainable
                  infrastructure development. Thus, in the northern region, the initial action
                  is to manage state-owned lands to incentivise the development of shared
                  infrastructure to meet the demand of projects, and in the southernmost
                  part of the country, it seeks to enhance the role of public companies, the
                  National Petroleum Company (ENAP), and the Southern Port Company
                  (EPA) so that they can coordinate to valorise their assets to structure
                  logistic development around this new industry, all to trigger public and




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                          page 130
                  private actions that achieve the goal. On the other hand, in industrialised
                  regions and municipalities, the aim is to enhance existing logistic
                  platforms, productive linkages, and local demand, helping to decarbonise
                  the regional productive matrix.


                  In addition, it is proposed to strengthen the role of the Ministry of Public
                  Works in providing enabling infrastructure and shared use of projects,
                  along with generating conditions that allow for a productive reconversion
                  of areas in energy transition, to develop this new industry where it is
                  competitive. Finally, in terms of enabling infrastructure planning, the
                  challenge of intersectoral coordination in its conceptualisation and
                  optimisation is proposed, as well as the need to aim for its materialisation
                  and implementation through Investment Plans of the executing State
                  infrastructure portfolios (regular portfolio, programming agreements,
                  and concessions), public companies, and private developers themselves.

                  Below are the actions and milestones leading to timely enabling
                  infrastructure for the green hydrogen and derivatives industry.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                         page 131
LINE OF ACTION 9:
ENABLING INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT

                                ACTIONS


39. Addressing the challenges of enabling infrastructure within the
framework of intersectoral coordination


40. Planning the enabling infrastructure development for the green
hydrogen and derivatives industry

41. Developing investment plans in enabling infrastructure for the green
hydrogen and derivatives industry

42. Tendering state-owned lands for the development of infrastructure for
the value chain of the green hydrogen and derivatives industry




     MILESTONES

               Incorporation of the Ministry of Energy into the National         Criteria for Sustainable Public Infrastructure (Ministry of Public
               Commission for the Use of Coastal Border (CNUBC from              Works)
               its acronym in Spanish) of the Ministry of Defence
                                                                                 Bid award for reinforcement of Mardones Pier, Magallanes
               Incorporation of the Ministry of Energy into the                  Region (EPA).
               National Commission for Logistics Development

               Incorporation of Regional Energy Secretariats into                Sustainable Public Infrastructure Criteria (MOP from its acronym in Spanish).
               Regional Coastal Use Commissions
                                                                                 Study for identification of state-owned lands for
               Integrated planning study of green hydrogen and
                                                                                 disposal
               derivatives infrastructure
                                                                                 Agreement between the Ministry of National Assets and
               Study of social evaluation methodologies for projects             the Ministry of Energy for the Land Tender Plan
               associated with the green hydrogen industry
               Design of Logistics Development Plan in the                       Tendering of state-owned lands for the development
               Magallanes Region                                                 of shared infrastructure for the value chain of green
               Design of Logistics Development Plan for the Northern Macrozone   hydrogen and derivatives.




                         Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                              page 132
Action 39. Address the
challenges of enabling
infrastructure for the green
hydrogen and derivatives
industry within the framework of
intersectoral coordination

 Objective:      Establish intersectoral coordination on enabling infrastructure for

 the development of the green hydrogen and derivatives industry, in the planning
 and investment sphere, to ensure coherence with national policies. The participation
 of the Ministry of Energy in these instances will be promoted as the competent body.


 In this context, the National Coastal Border Use Commission (CNUBC) and the
 National Logistics Development Commission (CONALOG from its acronym in
 Spanish) are particularly relevant, given the need for integrated planning of the
 value chain infrastructure. Understanding that this exceeds the competencies of the
 Ministry of Energy, along with the significant challenges in materialising critical
 infrastructures such as pipelines, storage facilities, ports for importing inputs and
 exporting/coastal shipping of products, and water intake for desalination, among
 others. Definitions within the framework of infrastructure plans, instruments such as
 Coastal Use Zonings, the definition of reserve areas, and the granting of maritime
 concessions are crucial for their development.


 Timeline: 2024-2025

 Milestones:

 •   2024: Incorporation of the Ministry of Energy into the National Coastal
     Border Use Commission (CNUBC). (Ministry of National Defence, MINDEF).


 •   2024: Incorporation of the Ministry of Energy into the National Logistics
     Development Commission (CONALOG). (Ministry of Transportation and
     Communications, MTT).




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                 page 133
       •   2025: Incorporation of Regional Energy Secretariats into Regional

            Coastal Use Commissions (CRUBC). (Regional Government, GORE from its

       acronym in Spanish).


       Responsible Institution: Ministry of Transport and Telecommunications,
       Ministry of Defence, Regional Governments, in coordination with other relevant
       agencies.




   Action 40. Plan the enabling
   infrastructure development for
   the green hydrogen and
   derivatives industry

       Objective: Plan enabling infrastructure for the green hydrogen and derivatives
       industry, considering public and private investment in a systemic approach.


       Initially, existing instruments that can channel the complexity of the integral vision
       required by the green hydrogen and derivatives value chain, incorporating public
       and private initiatives, and ensuring coherence with territorial planning, will be
       targeted. Simultaneously, progress will be made in developing methodological
       improvements towards intersectoral infrastructure planning.

       Planning will advance through the development of Logistics Master Plans (PML from
       its acronym in Spanish) nationwide, focusing initially on the Magallanes and
       Antofagasta regions, promoting the use of existing or new infrastructure shared to
       meet the service demands of diverse cargoes, including green hydrogen and
       derivatives. These plans will guide the government's decision-making for the
       promotion of specific enabling infrastructure projects.


       The design of PMLs includes territorial characterisation of different uses and
restrictions on the territory established in various existing instruments and involves key
stakeholders' participation: users, logistics operators, and public bodies.




       Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                  page 134
It must be consistent with national policies, legal and regulatory frameworks, and
international treaties. This instrument will also serve as a basis for tools such as
reserved coastal areas or guiding the allocation of maritime and port concessions.
The Plan being developed in the Magallanes Region incorporates the coordination
of investments by the National Petroleum Company (ENAP) and the Austral Port
Company (EPA), along with coordination with the Magallanes Green Hydrogen
“Transforma” Programme.


Finally, an exploratory methodology will be developed for the planning instruments
of competent public agencies (MTT, MOP, and MEN), to jointly address the enabling
infrastructure planning of the hydrogen and its derivatives value chain, along with a
review of the methodologies available from the Ministry of Social Development for
social project evaluation, allowing for a comprehensive approach to the green
hydrogen and its derivatives value chain, establishing social benefits that may not
be currently valued.


Timeline: 2023-2025

Milestones:

•   2024: Integrated planning study of green hydrogen and derivatives
    infrastructure. This action is supported by the Ministry of Economy through the
    Sustainable Productive Development Programme (DPS). (MEN, MTT, MOP)


•   2024: Study of social evaluation methodologies for projects associated
    with the green hydrogen industry. This action is supported by the Ministry of
    Economy through the Sustainable Productive Development Programme (DPS).
    (MEN/MDS)


•   2024: Design of Logistics Development Plan in the Magallanes Region,
    according to the Methodological Guide approved by Exempt Resolution No.
    1702 of the Ministry of Transport and Telecommunications, dated August 21,
    2020. This action is supported by the Ministry of Economy through the
    Sustainable Productive Development Programme (DPS). (MTT)


•   2025: Design of Logistics Development Plan for the Northern Macrozone,
    according to the Methodological Guide approved by Exempt Resolution No.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                 page 135
           1702 of the Ministry of Transport and Telecommunications, dated August 21, 2020
           (MTT)


       Responsible Institution: Ministry                of Energy, Ministry of Transport and

       Telecommunications, Ministry of Public Works, Ministry of Defence, Ministry of
       Social Development and Family, and Ministry of Economy, Development, and
       Tourism.




 Action 41. Develop investment
 plans in enabling infrastructure
 for the green hydrogen and
 derivatives industry

       Objective: Develop and execute enabling infrastructure for the green hydrogen
       and derivatives industry through direct public investment, in collaboration with
       private companies or private investment, within the framework of intersectoral
       planning and existing territorial instruments.

       At the national level, the aim is to address the needs of port infrastructure and road
       and rail connectivity for ports managed by the 10 state-owned Port Companies,
       considering all types of cargo, including those associated with the green hydrogen
       and derivatives industry, through the update of the National Port Development Plan
       and the preparation of investment plans for port companies.

       In the Magallanes and Chilean Antarctic Region, aligned with the Magallanes
       Logistics Development Plan, a coordinated and complementary action is projected
       by the Austral Port Company (EPA from its acronym in Spanish) with an investment
       plan to reinforce, expand, and provide dock cranes at Mardones for the unloading
       of necessary equipment and inputs; together with the National Petroleum Company
       (ENAP from its acronym in Spanish) seeking to reconfigure its facilities and build
       new infrastructure in partnership with third parties, to capitalise on its strategic
       position in the fuel supply logistics chain in the region, including:




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                          page 136
       •   Infrastructure for equipment unloading in initial stages: Laredo


       •   Logistics integration infrastructure: Cabo Negro


       •   Enabling infrastructure for a new industrial complex: Bahía San Gregorio


       •   Enabling infrastructure for Tierra del Fuego in existing industrial area: Bahía
           Gente Grande - Percy.

       Finally, within the framework of the planning and implementation processes of the
       Ministry of Public Works (MOP from its acronym in Spanish) Public Infrastructure,
       the principles, guidelines, and directives defined by the MOP’s Sustainability Policy
       as well as the actions and measures of the Climate Change Mitigation and
       Adaptation Plans will be integrated, through the development of Sustainable Public
       Infrastructure Criteria, which in turn will guide private developers of this industry in
       good practices.


       Timeline: 2023-2025

       Milestones:

       •   2024: Submission of concession request for Laredo Pier, Magallanes
           Region (ENAP).


       •   2024: Awarding of tender for reinforcement of Mardones Pier,
           Magallanes Region (EPA).


       •   2025: Sustainable Public Infrastructure Criteria (MOP).


       Responsible Institution: State-Owned Enterprises System (SEP), Austral
       Port Company (EPA), National Petroleum Company (ENAP), Ministry of Transport
       and Telecommunications, Ministry of Public Works.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                          page 137
Action 42. Tender state-owned
lands for the development of
infrastructure for the value chain
of the green hydrogen and
derivatives industry


   Objective: Develop a bidding plan that incorporates specific segments of the
   green hydrogen and derivatives value chain, according to energy and land demand
   projections by the projects, as well as the proper coordination of land allocation and
   necessary easements, and incentive for shared use of strips by different networks,
   aiming for efficient land use.

   Priority will be given to generating a bidding process to encourage the provision of
   shared infrastructure by private developers through a tender of state-owned lands,
   evaluating the availability of lands in areas with the highest projections of hosting
   projects in the value chain of green hydrogen and its derivatives. The opportunity in
   the framework of project progress will be considered, along with sustainability
   criteria of the industry designed within this Plan, as well as the demands of nearby
   communities, archaeological heritage, and existing biodiversity, encouraging
   agreements between the parties.

   To support this plan, an agreement will be made between the Ministry of Energy
   and the Ministry of National Assets, which includes a working group to address the
   design of the plan and its territorial compatibility.


   Timeline: 2023-2030.

   Milestones:

   •   2024: Study for identification of state-owned lands for disposal through
       tenders for projects associated with the entire value chain of green hydrogen.
       This action is supported by the Ministry of Economy through the Sustainable




       Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan             page 138
           Productive Development Programme (DPS). (Ministry of Energy, MEN from its
           acronym in Spanish /Ministry of National Property, MBN from its acronym in
           Spanish)


       •   2025: Agreement between the Ministry of National Assets and the
           Ministry of Energy for the Land Tender Plan for Green Hydrogen and its
           derivatives along with its value chain. (Ministry of Energy, MEN/Ministry of
           National Property, MBN)


       •   2025: Tender of state-owned lands for the development of shared
           infrastructure for the value chain of green hydrogen and its derivatives. (MBN)


Responsible Institution: Ministry of National Assets, with support from |                 the
Ministry of Energy.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                       page 139
 6.10 DEMOGRAPHIC
 CHALLENGE OF THE
 ENERGY TRANSITION

                  The development of the green hydrogen industry and its derivatives
                 poses the need to address interconnected phenomena, such as energy
                 transition and the demographic challenge, along with their territorial
                 implications.   The   demographic     challenge    is   a   complex      issue,
                 encompassing dimensions such as migration, depopulation, seasonal
                 overpopulation or floating population, urban centre growth in density,
                 expansion or dispersion in rural areas, territorial location, and living
                 conditions, among others.

                  Therefore, the implications of the development of this industry on the
                 human settlement system need to be addressed comprehensively and
                 early on, through territorial planning and management. It is a priority and
                 an opportunity within the framework of the Sustainable Development
                 Goals and the New Urban Agenda.


                  In the short term, there is a proposal to develop new instruments and
                 regulations focused on the implications for temporary and permanent
                 human settlements, considering infrastructure requirements, amenities,
                 and housing, all subject to the Strategic Environmental Assessment
                 procedure. Additionally, in the medium term, the relevance of regulation
                 regarding temporary human settlements or construction camps
                 associated with the project construction phase will be reviewed.

                  This line of action consists of the following actions and milestones:




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                          page 140
LINE OF ACTION 10:
DEMOGRAPHIC CHALLENGE OF THE ENERGY TRANSITION

                              Actions


43. Elaborate Territorial Planning Instruments (TPI) addressing human
settlement development.


44. Review regulations concerning temporary human settlements




45. Review mechanisms for allocating resources for municipal
management capacity



    MILESTONES
                                                                           Note: Bar colours only indicate complementarity of
                                                                           measures
         Award of the tender for the Intercommunal Regulatory Plan (PRI)
         of Magallanes and Tierra del Fuego.
         Working group between the Ministry of Energy and the Ministry
         of Housing and Urban Planning to review applicable regulations
         regarding temporary human settlements

         Study of alternative mechanisms for local taxation


         Study and proposal for the calculation and allocation of
         the Municipal Common Fund in the category of floating
         population




                        Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan      page 141
Action 43. Develop Territorial
Planning Instruments (TPI)
addressing the development of
human settlements associated
with the new industry

  Objective: Plan the growth of populated centres and their infrastructure,
  equipment, and residence requirements, derived among others, from the
  development of the green hydrogen industry, evaluating existing territorial
  planning instruments and planning gaps.


  This will allow addressing key issues at the intercommunal level such as guiding
  growth through the definition of urban expansion limits and territorial structuring
  through the classification of land for the public road network. At the communal
  level, it aims to accommodate facilities in land use zoning, urban planning
  incentives to improve levels of social integration and urban sustainability, and
  projects, works, and measures that contribute to the achievement of the objectives
  of the Plan, among others. All of this complements what may be defined in the
  Regional Territorial Plans (PROTs) regarding the human settlement system and
  supports the territorial targeting of State programmes in these matters.

  In this context, at least the elaboration of the Intercommunal Regulatory Plan (PRI)
  of Magallanes and Tierra del Fuego and the evaluation of communal regulatory
  plans of the Province of Magallanes and Tierra del Fuego are identified in the first
  instance.


  Timeline: 2024-2030

  Milestone:

      •       Second half of 2024: Award of the tender for the Intercommunal
              Regulatory Plan (PRI) of Magallanes and Tierra del Fuego.




  Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                 page 142
 Responsible Institution: Ministry of Housing and Urban Planning,
 Regional Governments, and Municipalities.




Action 44. Review the regulation
regarding temporary human
settlements associated with the
green hydrogen industry and its
derivatives


 Objective: Review the relevance of the regulation regarding temporary human
 settlements or camps associated with the construction phase of projects, in order
 to adequately address the processing of authorisations and the requirements for
 infrastructure, equipment, and residence.


 Timeline:

 Milestone:

 •   2024: Establish a working group between the Ministry of Energy and the
     Ministry of Housing and Urban Planning to review applicable regulations
     regarding temporary human settlements.


 Responsible Institution: Ministry of Housing and Urban Planning, with
 support from the Ministry of Energy.




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan               page 143
Action 45. Review mechanisms
for allocating resources to
strengthen municipal
management capacity to address
the challenges of the industry's
installation in the territories

 Objective: Evaluate mechanisms to strengthen municipal management capacity
 for facilities and services, in order to address the challenges associated with the
 arrival of new population linked to the industry, in areas such as health, security,
 education, waste management, municipal works, community spaces, and others.

 This will be done through two instruments; on one hand, the method of calculating
 and allocating resources given the floating population within the framework of the
 Common Municipal Fund will be reviewed, and on the other hand, the formula for
 allocating municipal taxes to industrial taxpayers will be reviewed with the aim of
 collecting them in the territories where industrial facilities or establishments are
 located, with a view to their implementation in the period 2025-2030.


 Timeline: 2026-2027

 Milestones:

 •   2026: Technical, economic, and social evaluation study of alternative
     mechanisms of local taxation


 •   2027: Study and proposal for calculating and allocating the Common
     Municipal Fund in the item of floating population.



 Responsible Institution: Ministry of Finance and Undersecretariat of
 Regional and Administrative Development, with the support of the Ministry of
 Energy.




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                page 144
 6.11 ELECTRICITY
 TRANSMISSION AND
 ENERGY COSTS

                  The country's aspiration regarding hydrogen is to develop a highly
                 competitive industry that positions Chile as a leader in hydrogen and
                 derivative exports. When analysing production costs, it becomes evident
                 that the cost and availability of clean energy are determining factors for
                 Chile to achieve its goals as a hydrogen producer. It will be necessary to
                 implement regulatory and market measures to minimise energy supply
                 costs, and even explore options for generating revenue from hydrogen
                 production plants by providing services to the National Electric System.
                 To achieve this, progress must be made in the development of
                 regulations for generation-consumption projects, enabling demand in
                 complementary and sufficiency services, and implementing measures
                 that strengthen the recognition of electrical demand for hydrogen and
                 derivative production in long-term energy planning and electric
                 transmission expansion.

                  In parallel with this Green Hydrogen Action Plan, a Decarbonisation Plan
                 for the electric system is being developed to establish enabling
                 conditions of a regulatory, technological, and institutional nature to
                 accelerate the decarbonisation of the electricity matrix and, consequently,
                 the national economy. This plan places special emphasis on the
                 retirement and conversion of coal-fired power plants, the corresponding
                 facilitation of productive conversion possibilities supporting a fair energy
                 transition, and the provision of flexibility attributes and complementary
                 services to the National Electric System, enabling a cost-effective
                 decarbonisation process of the electricity matrix, reflecting better
                 development costs of the grid, achieving greater efficiency in energy
                 costs, power, complementary services, and transmission infrastructure.
                 This Plan will be developed during the first half of 2024 and will provide
                 a roadmap of reforms and regulatory adjustments that will improve the
                 efficiency of the electricity system




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                        page 145
                  costs, which will impact the competitiveness of economic activities
                  intensive in electricity use, such as green hydrogen.

                  Actions and milestones considered in this line are as follows:




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                           page 146
LINE OF ACTION 11:
ELECTRICITY TRANSMISSION AND ENERGY COSTS

                             ACTIONS


46. Strengthen the methodology of Long-Term Energy Planning (PELP).



47. Amend regulatory bodies to address the operation of generation-
consumption systems defined in the Electricity Law.



48. Enable residential customers to connect to the transmission of green
hydrogen projects.



49. Implement the participation of green hydrogen and derivative projects
in electricity markets to provide various services.




    MILESTONES


           Document with assumptions about hydrogen
          Incorporation of Magallanes electrical system modelling into
          PELP

          Development of consultancy for regulatory proposal

          Regulation sent to the Comptroller

          Isolated systems bill sent to Congress


          Publication of the Decarbonisation Plan roadmap

          Complete regulatory, regulatory, and normative
          implementation




                       Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan      page 147
 Action 46. Strengthen the Long-
 Term Energy Planning (PELP)
 methodology to address the
 challenge of the green hydrogen
 industry


       Objective: Strengthen the PELP in projecting the demand for green hydrogen
       and expand its scope to the Magallanes and Chilean Antarctic region.


       With the aim of having a robust estimation of the potential demand for hydrogen
       and its derivatives in Chile, the Ministry of Energy will enhance the PELP in the
       development of on/off-grid green hydrogen production projects. This will consider
       the main sectors and/or economic activities where hydrogen and its derivatives can
       be used as an energy vector or industrial raw material in the short, medium, and
       long term (by 2060), serving as input for public policies that promote the use of
       hydrogen in various productive sectors with potential, contributing to
       decarbonisation and the goal of carbon neutrality.

       Moreover, all tasks related to the study of electric transmission planning for the
       Magallanes region, which is not currently covered as it does not belong to the
       National Electric System (SEN), will be established within the PELP processes.


       Timeline: 2024-2025

       Milestones:

       •    End of 2025: Incorporate improvements to the modelling of connection or
              disconnection to the grid of green hydrogen projects nationwide into the 2025
              Long-Term Energy Planning (PELP) Update Background Report (IAA)14 .




       14
            Report updating annual energy demand and supply projections.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                            page 148
 •   End of 2025: Incorporate modelling of the electric system planning for
      Magallanes into PELP.


 Responsible Institution: Ministry of Energy.




Action 47. Amend regulatory
frameworks to address the
operation of generation-
consumption systems defined in
Article 225 of the General
Electricity Services Law


 Objective:      Amend regulations to establish the provisions and requirements

 necessary for the proper application of Article 225, subsection (f) of the General
 Electricity Services Law, introduced through the storage law (No. 21.505), which
 defines generation-consumption systems and specifies that the corresponding
 charges will be calculated considering the energy and power withdrawn from the
 grid, and in no case by the potential energy supplied. This will be carried out through
 a review and adaptation of the Regulation of Coordination and Operation of the
 National Electric System (DS125 of 2019), as well as specific modifications to other
 regulations and technical standards to ensure that this legal definition is fully
 defined at the regulatory level.

 This action will establish the costs that projects involving their own generation of
 renewable energy at a connection point would have to bear, and therefore would
 not require withdrawing all the electrical demand necessary for hydrogen
 production from the electric system. The methodology for calculating the costs
 associated with electrical infrastructure for generation-consumption systems will be
 defined in a collaborative effort involving the Ministry of Energy, the National Energy
 Commission, the National Electric Coordinator, with technical support from GIZ,
 considering participation from industry and society at large.




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                  page 149
Timeline: 2023-2025

Milestones:

•   2024: Development of specialised consultancy to define regulatory
    proposal enabling the legal application of generation-consumption systems.


•   Mid-2025: Submission of regulatory modification to the General Comptroller's
    Office.


Responsible Institution: Ministry of Energy.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan             page 150
Action 48. Enable the availability
of connection for residential
customers to the transmission of
hydrogen projects



 Objective: The Ministry of Energy introduced the medium-sized systems bill in
 January 2024 through bill 327-371, defining a new classification of isolated systems
 for productive purposes. The details of this new classification will be addressed in
 an upcoming isolated systems bill, which will be submitted to Congress this year
 2024. The aim of this measure is to enable the connection of residential customers
 to these isolated systems for productive purposes and to define conditions for it.


 Timeline: 2023-2025

 Milestone:

 •   End of 2024: Submission of the Isolated Systems bill to Congress.


 Responsible Institution: Ministry of Energy




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                page 151
Action 49. Implementing the
participation of green hydrogen,
ammonia, and other derivatives
projects in electricity markets to
provide various services, such as
energy, capacity, and ancillary
services



 Objective: This action continues one of the measures of the 2020-2023 Action
 Plan contained in the National Green Hydrogen Strategy, within the axis of
 regulations, safety, and pilots. This topic is being addressed within the framework
 of the Decarbonisation Plan, considering the development objectives of the
 electricity sector in line with the country's decarbonisation and carbon neutrality
 goals.


 Timeline: 2023-2026

 Milestones:

 •   2024: Publication of the roadmap of the Decarbonisation Plan.


 •   2026: Completion of regulatory, regulatory, and normative implementation.


 Responsible Institution: Ministry of Energy, with the support of the
 National Energy Commission and the National Electric Coordinator.




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                 page 152
 6.12 USES FOR
 DECARBONISING THE
 NATIONAL ECONOMY

                  Promoting local demand for green energy is key to realising the green
                  hydrogen industry, in line with the guidelines of the National Strategy,
                  contributing to achieving the decarbonisation objectives of our
                  economy. Green hydrogen and derivatives can serve as a solution to
                  replace traditional fuels in various sectors of the national economy, such
                  as industry and residential, reducing both global and local emissions. In
                  turn, the use of low-emission fuels produced in Chile will increase the
                  country's energy independence level by reducing exposure to
                  fluctuations in international markets. Furthermore, it will allow for a green
                  footprint, that is, decarbonising the production cycles of goods and
                  services in the national economy, particularly those that make up the
                  export basket; and it will enable the development of national and local
                  productive chains, generating added value in the regions and the
                  national economy.

                  To enable a fuel switch in different energy usage sectors, efforts should
                  be made to identify potential demands in sectors such as industrial,
                  transportation in its various modes, and electricity generation. The
                  potential demand for green hydrogen and derivatives associated with the
                  implementation of Sustainable Aviation Fuels (SAF) is also being explored
                  through the Clean Flight programme and the SAF Roadmap, initiatives
                  developed jointly by the Ministry of Energy, the Energy Sustainability
                  Agency, and the Civil Aviation Board, and through public-private
                  collaboration. Railway transport could also represent a potential sector
                  to drive demand for green hydrogen and derivatives.

                  To drive this line of action, ENAP can play a key role in the early stages,
                  providing the necessary supply for applications of hydrogen and




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                          page 153
                  derivatives in the industrial and commercial sectors, around its refineries
                  and its future green hydrogen production plant in Magallanes.

                  Below are the actions and milestones contained in this line.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                        page 154
LINE OF ACTION 12:
USES FOR DECARBONISING THE NATIONAL ECONOMY

                               ACTIONS


50. Develop a green hydrogen plant in Cabo Negro, Magallanes




51. Mapping of end uses of the national industrial sector for fuel
switching


52. Analyse alternatives to advance in the production of
renewable/synthetic fuels by ENAP


53. Promote the conversion of thermal power plants, using alternatives with
hydrogen-based fuels


54. Promote energy decarbonisation in the medium and isolated systems
of the country



MILESTONES                                                                          Proposal for progress to implement an alternative
                                                                                    renewable/synthetic fuel production.
             First sod of the plant laid                                            First analysis of technologies and inputs

            Start of operations in Cabo Negro                                       Reconversion study of power plants
                                                                                    completed
             Blending of natural gas - hydrogen begins at ENAP
             facilities                                                             Publication of the roadmap of the Decarbonisation Plan
                Use of GH2 in ENAP vehicles
                                                                                    First coal-fired power generation unit converted
             Applications for partial use in the industrial and/or
             commercial sector of GH2 or derivatives                                Legislative processing of the bill on social security matters
             Results of Diagnostic Study
                                                                                    Presentation and dispatch of the bill on autonomous communities to Congress
            Continuous updating and annual reports
                                                                                    Legislative processing of the bill on autonomous communities
            Prioritisation of applications                                           Regulatory and normative adaptation for the correct application of laws.
                                                                                    Construction and operation of the first projects based on clean
                                                                                    fuels such as green hydrogen and derivatives.

                                                                              Note: Bar colours only indicate complementarity of measures




                        Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                                         page 155
Action 50. Develop a green
hydrogen plant in Cabo Negro,
Magallanes


       Objective:      Construct a green hydrogen production plant for internal

       consumption at ENAP Magallanes. The plant will allow hydrogen injection into
       gas networks at the ENAP industrial complex in Cabo Negro, and conduct
       blending tests between hydrogen and hydrogen-based fuels. Additionally,
       ENAP aims to gain knowledge and experience in the production and use of
       green hydrogen, as well as understanding the conditions of the Magallanes
       and Chilean Antarctic region for the development of this industry.


       Timeline: 2024 - 2025

       Milestones:

       •   2024: Laying the foundation stone for the plant.


       •   2025: Commencement of operations.


       •   2026: Initiation of natural gas - green hydrogen blending at
           ENAP facilities.


       •   2026: Delivery of fuel (GH2) to ENAP's internal use vehicles.


       •   2027: Presentation of 2 to 3 applications for partial use of GH2 or
           derivatives in the industrial and/or commercial sector.


       Responsible Institution: National Petroleum Company (ENAP).




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                       page 156
Action 51. Mapping of end uses
in the national industrial sector
for fuel replacement


  Objective: Identify      and map the potential demand in the national industrial

  sector where there is the possibility of fuel replacement in their processes, allowing
  a transition to the use of green hydrogen or derivatives, thereby decarbonising their
  operations. This includes identifying options for conversion and adaptation of their
  processes according to projected technological offerings.


  Timeline: 2025-2030

  Milestones:

  •   2025: Results of diagnostic study.


  •   2025 - 2030: Continuous updates and annual public reports.


  •   2026: Prioritisation of applications that are closer to the market to
      support the activation of the domestic industry by identifying break-even
      points as established in the national GH2 strategy.


  Responsible Institution: Ministry of Energy.




  Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                 page 157
Action 52. Analyse alternatives to
advance in the production of
renewable/synthetic fuels by
ENAP


 Objective: Diversify the fuel supply and contribute to Chile's carbon neutrality
 goals by 2050, by conducting technical studies at its refineries to start producing
 synthetic fuels and renewable fuels.


 Timeline: 2024-2030

 Milestones:

 •   2025: First analysis of technologies and inputs.


 •   2026: Proposal for progress to implement some alternative for the
     production of renewable/synthetic fuel.


 Responsible Institution: National Petroleum Company (ENAP).




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                 page 158
Action 53. Promote the
conversion of thermal power
plants, using alternatives with
hydrogen-based fuels



      Objective: Analyse and implement alternatives for converting thermal power
      plants to hydrogen and synchronous condenser technologies. The study includes
      the analysis of two technological options for converting thermal power plants and
      integrating them into the National Electric System, using hydrogen and hydrogen-
      based fuels, through co-combustion or blending options.


      Timeline: 2023-2030

      Milestones:
      •   2024: Study on the reconversion of power plants completed.


      •   2024: Publication of the roadmap of the Decarbonisation Plan, which will
          include incentives for the conversion of thermal power plants.


      •   2030: First coal-fired power generation unit converted.


      Responsible Institution: Ministry of Energy, with support from the
      Ministry of Economy through the Sustainable Productive Development
      Programme (DPS).




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                     page 159
Action 54. Promote energy
decarbonisation in medium and
isolated systems throughout the
country

      Objective:      Advance concrete actions for energy decarbonisation in medium

      and isolated systems throughout the country, considering clean and renewable
      energy alternatives such as green hydrogen and/or its derivatives, such as ammonia
      or others. This contributes to the legal goal of achieving carbon neutrality before
      2050, across different national territories.


      To achieve this, regulatory, and normative updates will be developed to promote
      decarbonisation in these medium and isolated systems, starting with the legislative
      process of medium systems and isolated systems bills, aiming to reduce the
      conditions of energy poverty present in the country, particularly in the case of
      isolated systems.


      Timeline: 2024-2030

      Milestones:

      •   2024-2025: Legislative process of the Medium Systems
          bill.


      •   2024: Presentation and dispatch of the Isolated Systems bill to
          Congress.


      •   2025-2026: Legislative process of the Isolated Systems bill.


      •   2026-2027: Regulatory and normative adaptation for the correct application of
          the laws.


      •   2028-2030: Construction and operation of the first projects based on clean
          fuels such as green hydrogen and derivatives, contributing to decarbonisation
          in territories of the country.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                      page 160
        Responsible Institution: Ministry of Energy, with the support of the
        National Energy Commission.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan              page 161
 6.13
 DEMONSTRATIVE
 PROJECTS
                 Under the current conditions of deploying the green hydrogen industry,
                 demonstrative projects play a fundamental role, allowing the generation
                 of information regarding project implementation, their potential social
                 and environmental impacts, and the validation of technology use across
                 different sectors.


                 In this context, the short-term development of green hydrogen
                 demonstrative projects will be promoted to document practical
                 experiences. These projects will encourage the production and/or
                 consumption of hydrogen at a local level, foster complementary activities
                 that contribute to capacity building for the maturity of the hydrogen
                 market, promote the dissemination and transfer of knowledge related to
                 the industry, and allow for bringing these technologies closer to citizens.


                 This line of action consists of two actions and four milestones. One aspect
                 focuses on co-financing the development of feasibility studies for the
                 deployment of small-scale consumption, self-consumption, and/or
                 production projects. The other aspect aims to raise awareness of the use
                 of green hydrogen among citizens by implementing this technology in
                 everyday experiences, such as public transportation.

                 It is important to note that the Ministry of Energy has a New Energetics
                 unit, part of the Fuels and New Energetics Division, which serves as a
                 platform for supporting the development of green hydrogen and its
                 derivatives pilot projects.


                 The detailed actions and milestones for this line of action are as

                 follows:




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                         page 162
LINE OF ACTION 13:
DEMONSTRATIVE PROJECTS

                               Actions

55. Encourage the use of green hydrogen and its derivatives in the local
industry through co-financing pilot projects of green hydrogen and its
derivatives

56. Implement a pilot project of green hydrogen bus in public transportation




MILESTONES                                                                          Note: Bar colours only indicate complementarity
                                                                                    of measures
            Adjudication of projects in the third edition of the green hydrogen
            accelerator

            Evaluation of continuity of the accelerator

            Purchase of the bus

            Commencement of pilot operation




                        Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan           page 163
Action 55. Foster local industry
consumption of green hydrogen
and its derivatives through co-
financing pilot projects of green
hydrogen and its derivatives



 Objective: Foster local productive transformations towards decarbonisation by
 industrial process reconversion that demand green hydrogen, through the Green
 Hydrogen Accelerator (AGH2) programme of the Ministry of Energy. The
 programme provides co-financing for the deployment of consumption and/or
 production projects on a small and medium scale.


 In its third edition, the accelerator will fund projects that use an electrolyser with a
 power equal to or less than 500 kW. The continuity of the accelerator, including
 scope and objectives, will be defined considering industry needs and the evaluation
 of results obtained in previous editions.


 Timeline: From 2024

 Milestones:

 •   May 2024: Adjudication of projects for the third edition of the AGH2
     programme


 •   2024 - 2030: Continuation of the programme to support the realisation of
 GH2 applications as defined in the Strategy.



 Responsible Institution: Ministry of Energy.




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                   page 164
Action 56. Implement a pilot
project of a hydrogen bus in
public transportation to evaluate
the technical, economic, and
social aspects of deploying this
technology

 Objective: The main goal of this pilot is to evaluate, technically, economically,
 and socially, passenger transportation solutions with green hydrogen in operating
 conditions, bringing hydrogen technology closer to the public. To achieve this, the
 Ministry of Energy, through a broad agreement with the Ministry of Transportation
 and Telecommunications and the Metropolitan Public Transport Directorate, and in
 coordination with private entities, is promoting the deployment of a hydrogen bus
 in the streets of the Metropolitan region as part of the public transportation network.
 The pilot project involves conducting necessary tests to gather information that
 allows evidence-based decision-making regarding the scaling-up of this technology.

 The possibility and relevance of conducting another pilot bus experiment in regions
 with regulated public transportation will be evaluated.


 Timeline: 2024-2025

 Milestones:

 •   Fourth quarter of 2024: Purchase of the bus.


 •   First half of 2025: Commencement of pilot operation.


 Responsible Institutions: Ministry of Energy in conjunction with the
 Ministry of Transportation and Telecommunications and the Metropolitan Public
 Transport Directorate. This initiative is supported by the RH2 project of GIZ.




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                  page 165
 6.14 BOOSTING
 PRODUCTIVE
 LINKAGES

                  The green hydrogen and derivatives industry has characteristics that
                  could configure new, more inclusive, sustainable, and high-value-added
                  industrial systems, capable of gradually attracting new highly
                  sophisticated or emerging productive sectors that demand intensive use
                  of clean energy. Consequently, it represents an opportunity to create
                  more and better jobs and generate local economic opportunities while
                  reducing the risk of external dependency.

                  Furthermore, the integration of this productive activity has the potential
                  to extend goods and services, such as electric connection networks
                  and/or supply energy to isolated areas. In regions with water scarcity
                  issues, it could provide access to water through multipurpose
                  desalination plants, thereby promoting territorial decentralisation and
                  fostering the development of rural communities.

                  For Chile to have the technological capabilities to manufacture machinery
                  and equipment for the green hydrogen and derivatives industry, it must
                  develop greater productive diversification. Therefore, it is relevant to
                  promote targeted public policies that, leveraged by the country's and its
                  regions' comparative advantages, allow for the enhancement of product
                  clusters requiring industrial capabilities.

                  Given the above, it is crucial to support and strengthen local capacities in
                  productive activities related to the hydrogen value chain, as well as attract
                  international companies to install their manufacturing capabilities in
                  Chile for the production of sophisticated equipment, or alternatively, for
                  integration and assembly of components.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                          page 166
                                                Below are the actions and milestones aimed at boosting productive
                                                linkages associated with the green hydrogen industry and its derivatives.




LINE OF ACTION 14:
BOOSTING PRODUCTIVE LINKAGES

                              ACTIONS

57. Drive technological transformations in the industry through the
"Impulsa Technological Transition" short instrument


58. Identify companies providing services related to the value chain of green
hydrogen and its derivatives, and make this information available



59. Promote the establishment of electrolyser factories in Chile




MILESTONES
                                                                                                           Note: Bar colours only indicate
            First call for the "Impulsa Technological Transition"                                          complementarity of measures
            instrument
            Continuation of the programme

             Publication of initiative report

            Publication of RFP call

            Award and contract with selected company/companies




                         Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                            page 167
Action 57. Drive technological
transformations in the industry
through CORFO's "Impulsa
Transición Tecnológica"
instrument

 Objective:       The new CORFO instrument called "Impulsa Technological

 Transition" aims to technologically transform the national industry and support
 suppliers through co-financing projects, in order to address the new challenges and
 opportunities associated with value chains of emerging sectors, including the green
 hydrogen and derivatives industry. It will be supported by the Ministry of Economy
 through the Sustainable Productive Development Programme (DPS).


 Timeline: 2024-2025 Design and implementation. Available until 2030.

 Milestones:

 •   2024: First call for the "Impulsa Technological Transition" instrument.


 •   2025-2030: Continuation of the programme.


 Responsible Institution: CORFO, with support from the Ministry of
 Economy through the Sustainable Productive Development Programme (DPS)




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                 page 168
Action 58. Identify and make
available information associated
with companies providing
services related to the value
chain of the green hydrogen and
derivatives industry


 Objective: To have information about national companies that can cover part
 of the needs and gaps in goods and services associated with hydrogen technologies,
 considering the corresponding safety and/or certification criteria, enhancing local
 development and allowing capacity building to remain in the territories. The
 initiative will be developed in coordination with similar inputs from other instances,
 such as regional Roadmaps. This information may serve as a reference for the
 industry itself or as input for the design of potential measures to promote value
 chain development.


 Timeline: 2024

 Milestone:

 •   2024: Publication of report on initiative development.


 Responsible Institution: Ministry of Energy, with the support of the
 Spanish Agency for International Development Cooperation (AECID).




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                 page 169
Action 59. Foster the
establishment of electrolyser
factories in Chile

 Objective: To convene a Request for Proposal (RFP) process through which real
 proposals will be sought from national and international companies to promote the
 manufacturing and assembly industry of electrolysers in the national territory, with
 a potential definition of incentives and/or public policies for their promotion. This
 initiative arises from the analysis of the results of a recent Request for Information
 (RFI) process for electrolysers developed by CORFO, which aimed to identify those
 companies interested in manufacturing and/or assembling electrolysers in Chile, and
 under what conditions they would be installed to supply the national and regional
 market. This call aims to contribute to sustainable productive development and the
 creation of a green hydrogen industry, to accelerate the implementation of initiatives
 that contribute to decarbonisation and a fair energy transition.


 Timeline: 2024-2025 Design and implementation.

 Milestones:

 •   2024: Publication of RFP announcement.


 •   First half of 2025: Adjudication and contract with the selected company or
     companies.


 Responsible Institution: CORFO.




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                    page 170
 6.15 STRENGTHENING AND
 DEVELOPMENT OF HUMAN
 CAPITAL

                  For the deployment and operation of the green hydrogen industry and
                 its value chain in the country, it is necessary to have qualified individuals
                 who apply the necessary knowledge in the various links of the production
                 process.


                  To this end, capacities will be developed according to the needs of the
                 industry today and in the future, allowing to fill the identified gaps to
                 increase skilled work and strengthen the workforce of the green hydrogen
                 productive sector and associated industries, through training and
                 education at all levels.


                  In the short term, new knowledge will be delivered and reinforced to
                 people who wish to work in this industry and who already have experience
                 in fuel or chemical substance management areas, who will be the most
                 suitable to respond to the immediate needs of the first projects. At the
                 same time, new knowledge will be incorporated into existing training
                 programmes at different educational levels: secondary education,
                 technical-professional secondary education, technical higher education,
                 and professional higher education, as well as training for people with no
                 similar knowledge of the green hydrogen industry and its derivatives.

                  The labour market is very dynamic, and the needs for occupations and
                 skills are constantly evolving. The development of these skills responds
                 much less to demand. Therefore, it is important to generate clear
                 governance among territories, their industry, and different educational
                 institutions. Initiatives that are strengthened and developed with the
                 formation of human capital require strict inter-institutional coordination
                 within the State and with other agents outside the public sphere, such as
                 academia and the private sector.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                         page 171
                                                This line of action includes the following actions and milestones aimed
                                                at having human capital that meets the challenges of this industry.




LINE OF ACTION 15:
STRENGTHENING AND DEVELOPMENT OF HUMAN CAPITAL
                             ACTIONS


60. Sectoral staffing of the Technical Professional Qualifications
Framework (TPQF) and curriculum proposal


61. Develop operational skills for technicians in green hydrogen energy



62. Execution of training programmes for competitiveness in green
hydrogen and its derivatives


63. Competition for internships abroad for industrial workers



64. Implement the "Train the Trainers" programme.




65. Implementation of a practical teaching module in technical-
professional high schools in different regions of the country




MILESTONES

           Prospective Study on Employment and Vocational Training           First competition for internships abroad and continuity of
           in Green Sectors: green hydrogen in Chile                         the programme in subsequent years

          Second Diagnostic Study of specific profiles for future            Conducting a technological tour for vocational education
          incorporation into CFT curricula, under the MCTP                   instructors (7) and university professors (8) and continued

          Proposal for updating curricular grids for
          Technical Training Centres (CFT) based on the                      Installation of electrolyser equipment in high schools,
          MCTP                                                               Magallanes Region (9) and in other regions of the country
                                                                             (10)
          Delivery of training programmes and training
          materials                                                                Note: Bar colours only indicate complementarity of measures.

          Annual publication of results of allocation to training courses
          and scholarships; and of labour competency programmes




                         Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                                       page 172
  Action 60. Sectoral Staffing of the
  Technical Professional
  Qualifications Framework
  (MCTP) and Curriculum Proposal

       Objective: To identify the occupational profiles required in the green hydrogen
       chain, a process that will be developed in conjunction with the private sector.


       Based on the information provided by the study, career paths, occupations, and skills
       required by the sector will be identified, and occupational profiles will be defined.

       In turn, these occupational profiles will populate the Sectoral Technical Professional
       Qualifications Framework (MCTP from its acronym in Spanish), following the
       guidelines of the TP Qualifications Advisory Commission of the Ministry of Education
       (Mineduc). The TPQF will be an input for training programmes, certification of labour
       competencies, and for updating, redirecting, and creating new curricula according
       to the country's needs and the labour market in the case of training institutions
       (which include Technical Training Centres (CFT) and Professional Institutes (IP)).


       Timeline: 2025-2030

       Milestones:

       •   2024: Prospective Study on Employment and Vocational Training in
           Green Sectors: Green Hydrogen in Chile.


       •   2025: Diagnostic Study of Specific Profiles for Future Incorporation into
           CFT curricula, under the MCTP.


       •   2026 - 2030: Proposal for the update of curricular frameworks for CFT
           based on the MCTP.


       Responsible Institution: Ministry of Energy in coordination with the
Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare and the Ministry of Education, with the support of
the




       Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                  page 173
       Spanish Agency for International Development Cooperation (AECID) and the IDB.




 Action 61. Develop operational
 capabilities for technicians in
 green hydrogen energy

       Objective:       Development of training and training programmes in the

       dimensions of operation, maintenance, safety, and risk prevention, among other
       topics associated with the facilities for production, transportation, storage, and
       consumption of green hydrogen and derivatives; aimed at technical-professional
       high school education, to strengthen the available human capital in the regions
       linked to the value chain of green hydrogen and derivatives.


       Timeline: 2024 - 2030

       Milestone:

       •   2025-2030: Delivery of training programmes and educational material.


       Responsible Institution: Ministry of Energy and Regional Governments
       (GOREs) with support from the Ministry of Energy in coordination with the Ministry
       of Education, with the support of the Spanish Agency for International Development
       Cooperation (AECID).




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                       page 174
Action 62. Implementation of
training programmes for
competitiveness in green
hydrogen and derivatives


 Objective:      This measure aims to strengthen human capital by addressing

 identified gaps, enhancing the quality and/or quantity of skilled labour,
 competencies, and learning of the current or potential workforce in the green
 hydrogen and derivatives productive sector and its entire value chain. To achieve
 this, actions such as (1) providing training scholarships, (2) certifying labour
 competencies, and (3) offering international school internships will be carried out.
 Additionally, an online course on green hydrogen "Opportunities and Applications"
 is conducted by women for women, with the mission of enhancing the capabilities
 of professionals to prepare projects related to green hydrogen generation based on
 technological, strategic, and economic criteria in the context of renewable energy
 development.


 Timeline: 2023 - 2030

 Annual and ongoing milestones:
 •   Annual publication of results of awards for training courses and scholarships;
     and labour competency programmes.


 Responsible Institution:             CORFO in coordination with the Ministry of

 Labour. This action is supported by the Ministry of Economy through the Sustainable
 Productive Development Programme (DPS).




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                page 175
Action 63. Overseas Internship
Competition for Industrial
Workers


  Objective: An internship programme will be developed focusing on workers
  with technical-professional training to have specialists in green hydrogen
  production. The process will consider a gender approach, inclusion of indigenous
  peoples, and individuals directly or indirectly affected by the closure of coal-fired
  power plants.


  Timeline: 2025-2030

  Annual and ongoing milestones:

  •   First competition for internships abroad and continuity of the programme in
       subsequent years


  Responsible Institution: Ministry of Energy in coordination with the
  National Agency for Research and Development (ANID).




  Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                  page 176
Action 64. Implementation of the
"Train the Trainers" Programme



       Objective:        To train technical-professional education mediators and

       university professors from regions through technological tours specialised
       for different stages of the green hydrogen value chain. This aims to
       contribute to the development of technical-professional and professional
       training programmes nationwide, enabling the addressing of identified
       industry needs.


       Timeline: 2025-2030.

       Milestones:

       •   2025: Organisation of technological tours for technical-professional
           education mediators and continuity.


       •   2025: Organisation of technological tours for university professors and
           continuity.


       Responsible Institution: Ministry of Energy in coordination with
       the Ministry of Education, with the support of the Spanish Agency for
       International Development Cooperation (AECID).




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                      page 177
Action 65. Implementation of a
practical teaching module in
technical-professional high
schools in different regions of
the country

  Objective:       A training and competency development programme will be

  designed for competencies associated with the operation of green hydrogen
  production     technologies,   aligned     with    the   technical-professional   training
  qualification framework (MCTP) of the energy sector. Funds will be allocated to
  strengthen the available infrastructure in technical-professional high schools and
  state technical training centres in the Magallanes Region, through the
  implementation of GH2 production training spaces, with equipment associated with
  electrolysis and complementary operational processes (such as fuel cells), which can
  be used by different technical-professional high schools for the practical teaching
  of the electrolysis process and operation of the electrolyser and other components
  of the value chain, different technologies, etc.


  Timeline: 2024-2030

  Milestones:

  •   2024: Installation of electrolyser equipment in high schools, Magallanes
       Region.


  •   2025-2030: Installation of electrolyser equipment in high schools in other
       regions of the country, prioritising the Antofagasta Region and the Biobío
  Region.


  Responsible Institution:                 Ministry of Education with support from the

  Ministry of Energy and the Ministry of Economy, Development, and Tourism.
  Additionally, the initiative receives support from the Spanish Agency for
  International Development Cooperation (AECID) and the Sustainable Productive
  Development (DPS) programme.




  Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                     page 178
 6.16 GENDER PERSPECTIVE
 IN THE INDUSTRY

                  Within the framework of a just energy transition, the development of new
                  industries becomes globally relevant, especially in the accelerated
                  advancement of new sectors such as the green hydrogen industry. Here
                  the opportunity arises to advance gender equality and the inclusion of
                  women, to ensure sustainable development that leaves no one behind.

                  Promoting the sustainable integration of women in emerging energy
                  industries requires addressing two dimensions of current challenges:
                  structural barriers and capacity gaps.


                  Among the structural barriers present in the industry, it is necessary to
                  identify and address requirements at the infrastructure and facility level
                  that do not consider the needs of women. Examples include gender-
                  focused health and sanitation aspects (hygienic supplies and facilities),
                  safety equipment of various sizes, as well as the existence of furniture and
                  facilities that recognise and acknowledge caregiving work and the
                  disproportionate burden it places on women's lives.

                  On the other hand, given the low 23% participation rate of women in the
                  energy sector, it is relevant to prioritise initiatives that address gender
                  difficulties and biases in recruitment processes, support for women's
                  career paths, promotion and consolidation of women's participation in
                  leadership positions and decision-making processes, promotion of
                  policies and initiatives for balancing personal, family, and work life,
                  violence against women and girls, as well as other critical issues that are
                  necessary to address in the energy industry from a gender perspective.

                  The energy sector, in line with international and national standards, has
                  the responsibility to advance the challenge of achieving gender equality
                  in the development of both traditional and new industries.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                         page 179
                  For this reason, within the framework of this Action Plan, an
                  interministerial gender committee on GH2 has been established, along
                  with the development of a gender mainstreaming strategy, where a series
                  of criteria and initiatives have been developed within the following areas
                  of focus:


                      •       Career paths: sustainable employment inclusion of women.


                      •       Leadership and participation of women in decision-making
                              processes in GH2.


                      •       Training and education: reducing gender gaps in GH2 training.


                  Impact of the industry on communities and localities: promoting and
                  driving a safety and gender approach in territories with GH2
                  development.


                  This line of work includes the following actions and milestones, which aim
                  to address and highlight the necessary needs for the deployment of this
                  sector with a gender perspective and the inclusion of women.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                        page 180
LINE OF ACTION 16:
GENDER PERSPECTIVE IN THE INDUSTRY

                               ACTIONS


66. Provide technical assistance to the green hydrogen industry for the
employment inclusion of women


67. Consolidate the Green Hydrogen Women's Network and train female
leaders in the industry

68. Ensure that at least 30% of women participate in all training and
certification processes of the Ministry of Energy in the field of green
hydrogen and derivatives


69. Elaborate and disseminate recommendations with gender perspectives
for the evaluation, installation, and operation of green hydrogen and
derivatives production and consumption projects.




MILESTONES                                                                                                 Note: Bar colours only indicate
                                                                                                           complementarity of measures
              Intersectional gender working group on green hydrogen

              Conduct at least one in-person annual meeting of the Network

              Online GH2 Course with a focus on women

              Diagnostic Study of specific profiles for future inclusion in
              CFT curricula, under the MCTP

              First standards validated with the industry

              Development of a good practice guide for compliance with gender standards for green
              hydrogen and derivatives projects
              Implementation, publication, and dissemination of the study on gender gaps in
              the green hydrogen and derivatives industry

              Development of recommendations for public spaces and human settlements with a
              gender and security focus




                          Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                           page 181
Action 66. Provide technical
assistance to the green hydrogen
industry for the employment
integration of women


 Objective: In line with the Energy + Women Plan and in coordination with other
 interministerial initiatives, technical assistance will be provided to hydrogen guilds
 and companies to deliver tools and knowledge management aimed at addressing
 sustainable female labour inclusion and local economic development with a gender
 perspective.


 Timeline: 2024-2025
 Milestone:
 May 2024: Intersectional gender working group in GH2.


 Responsible Institution: Ministry of Energy, Ministry of Economy,
 CORFO, Ministry of Women and Gender Equity, Ministry of Labour.




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                 page 182
Action 67. Consolidate the Green
Hydrogen Women's Network and
train industry leaders


  Objective: Strengthen the leadership skills of women in the green hydrogen
  industry in Chile, involving them in the gender mainstreaming strategy for the
  sector, with the aim of advancing towards the development of an inclusive industry
  with gender equality at corporate levels, as well as in communities and localities.



  Timeline: 2023-2030
  Annual Milestone:
  • Hold at least one meeting of the Women's GH2 Network.


  Responsible Institution: Ministry of Energy, Ministry of Economy,
  CORFO, Ministry of Women and Gender Equity with support from GIZ.




  Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                 page 183
Action 68. Training of at least
30% of women in all training and
certification processes of the
Ministry of Energy in matters of
green hydrogen and derivatives



 Objective:      The Ministry of Energy has established gender quotas in all its

 training and certification programmes under the Human Capital programme. A
 quota of 30% of women of the total to be trained has been set, which will be
 safeguarded for areas related to green hydrogen and derivatives. Additionally,
 collaboration will be sought with other agencies in the gender mainstreaming
 strategy to position this focus in the training spaces of the hydrogen industry and
 its value chain, creating specific training and dissemination opportunities for
 women.


 In 2023, the Regional Government of Magallanes, together with the Ministry of
 Women and Gender Equity and the Ministry of Energy, signed an agreement to
 promote the inclusion of women in the green hydrogen industry and in training and
 capacity-building instances in the region, safeguarding the 30% quota.


 Timeline: From 2024.

 Milestones:

 •   2024: Online course on green hydrogen "Opportunities and Applications"
     with a focus on women, aimed at enhancing the capabilities of professionals to
     prepare projects related to green hydrogen generation according to
     technological, strategic, and economic criteria in the context of renewable
     energy development.


 •   Third quarter of 2025: Publication of the "Second Populate of the Qualification
     Framework for Technical Professional Training in the Energy Sector" study,
     where the technical qualification framework is updated to include new profiles,
     including those related to green hydrogen.



 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan               page 184
 Responsible Institution: Ministry of Energy, CORFO, Ministry of Women
 and Gender Equity, Ministry of Economy.




Action 69. Develop and
disseminate gender-focused
recommendations for the
evaluation, installation, and
operation of green hydrogen and
derivatives production and
consumption projects

 Objective: To establish policies and standards with a gender focus for the green
 hydrogen industry, considering aspects such as the development of inclusive
 enabling infrastructure, the generation of best practices for meeting gender
 standards for hydrogen projects, and recommendations for public spaces and the
 incorporation of gender and safety perspectives in the development of public
 spaces and human settlements.


 Timeline: 2024-2026

 Milestones:

 •   2024: First standards validated with the industry in the intersectional
     gender working group in GH2.


 •   2024: Development of a guide of best practices for meeting gender
     standards for green hydrogen projects, including health standards.




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                 page 185
       •   2025: Implementation, publication, and dissemination of the gender gap
           study in GH2.


       •   2025: Development of recommendations for public spaces and human
           settlements with a focus on gender and safety.


       Responsible Institution:              Ministry of Energy, Ministry of Economy,
       Ministry of Women and Gender Equity, Ministry of Health. These initiatives are
       supported by various institutions and programmes, including the Spanish Agency
       for International Development Cooperation (AECID) and those associated with
       CORFO's financial facilitation instrument.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                    page 186
 6.17 BOOSTING
 RESEARCH,
 DEVELOPMENT,
 AND
 INNOVATION
                 Public policy should promote continuous knowledge transfer, both
                 nationally and internationally, to enable timely generation of knowledge
                 and skills development that contributes to the development of the green
                 hydrogen industry, addressing the demands arising from the
                 advancement of a technologically innovative, challenging, and dynamic
                 sector.

                 To achieve this, there needs to be harmonious coordination among
                 research and innovation institutions, industry, and the public sector. The
                 state has the role of creating enabling conditions for effective innovation
                 and technological development processes at all levels that impact its
                 development. Research and innovation in green hydrogen and its value
                 chain provide an opportunity to contribute to broad and cross-cutting
                 national development objectives.

                 The establishment and operation of, for example, technological
                 development centres focused on the value chain of green hydrogen
                 production and supply, can generate the necessary infrastructure and
                 technical capacity for knowledge generation, provision of testing,
                 measurement, and certification services to academic and industrial
                 actors, thus driving technological advancements and solutions. In this
                 regard, the creation of two technological development centres, one led
                 by the Chilean Navy and another by the Regional Government of
                 Magallanes in the same region, stands out.

                 Below are the actions and milestones that will support and drive research,
                 development, and innovation for the green hydrogen and derivatives
                 industry, across its entire value chain.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                       page 187
LINE OF ACTION 17:
BOOSTING RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, AND INNOVATION

                                  ACTIONS


70. Analysis of R&D challenges in green hydrogen projects to complement
R&D Law


71. Development of R&D&I contests by the National Agency for Research
and Development (ANID)


72. Boosting specialised technological development through Green
Hydrogen Technology Development Centres


73. Compilation of equipment and scientific infrastructure data for
conducting R&D in green hydrogen


74. Generating and disseminating technological information related to the
green hydrogen and derivatives value chain




     MILESTONES

           Start of working group sessions.                                 Launch of the Technological Development Centre for the Maritime and
                                                                            Naval Industry of the Chilean Navy
           Publication of R&D Guide for the application of projects
           related to GH2 and derivatives to the R&D Law                    Development of a pilot propulsion system fuelled by synthetic
                                                                            fuel, by the Technological Development Centre for the Maritime
           ANID contests are held annually throughout the                   Industry
           period                                                           Publication of a study on scientific and technological needs and a plan
                                                                            for the enabling infrastructure development
            Launch of the Magallanes Technological
                                                                            Publication of the first version of national and international
            Development Centre
                                                                            patent indicators




                         Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                               page 188
Action 70. Analysis of R&D
challenges in green hydrogen
projects to complement R&D Law
and other associated instruments


 Objective:      To identify the main gaps and opportunities for scientific and

 technological research and development of green hydrogen in Chile through the
 formation of a working group between the Ministry of Science, Technology,
 Knowledge, and Innovation; CORFO; Ministry of Energy; Ministry of Economy,
 Development, and Tourism; and academia, related to the value chain of green
 hydrogen and its derivatives. The working group will involve timely coordination and
 participation of the private sector and other governance bodies that gather relevant
 information such as the “Transforma” programmes. This initiative will lead to the
 development of roadmaps and guides for R&D lines of work that guide projects
 associated with the value chain of green hydrogen and derivatives around the
 Research and Development Law and promote research, development, and
 innovation in those areas of greatest impact or need for the green hydrogen
 industry.


 Timeline: 2024-2030

 Milestones:

 •   2024: Start of working group sessions.


 •   2025: Publication of R&D Guide for the application of green hydrogen and
     derivatives projects to the R&D Law.


 Responsible Institutions: Ministry of Science, Technology, Knowledge,
 and Innovation, with the support of CORFO, Ministry of Energy, and Ministry of
 Economy, Development, and Tourism.




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                page 189
Action 71. Development of
research, development, and
innovation contests by the
National Agency for Research
and Development (ANID) related
to applications of production,
transportation, storage, and
consumption of green hydrogen
and derivatives


 Objective: Financially support the execution of scientific and technological
 applied research projects, with potential economic and/or social impact, especially
 with an emphasis on green hydrogen. For this purpose, the following competitions
 are available:
 a. FONDEF IDeA R&D & Advanced Technology IDeA Contests: Contest aimed at
     co-financing projects in the fields of applied research and technological
     development that require long cycles for the implementation of research
     methodologies, laboratory experiments, and prototype development. This call
     promotes the participation of projects that contribute to the following strategic
     objectives of the Sustainable Productive Development Programme: i) Just
     decarbonisation; ii) Resilience to the climate crisis and its environmental
     impacts, and iii) Sustainable productive diversification. In the line of just
     decarbonisation, emphasis will be placed on technological development for a
     sustainable green hydrogen industry and the generation of local demand for
     GH2.


 b. FONDEF Technological Research Contest: Contest aimed at developing and
     validating solutions based on scientific and technological foundations that
     require scaling stages to reach advanced maturity level technologies for
     application in the market. It calls for a wide range of thematic areas, including
     the energy and green hydrogen sector.




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                 page 190
 Timeline: 2024-2030
 Annual Milestone: Publication of results of allocation to training courses
 and scholarships; and labour competency programmes.


 Responsible Institution: National Agency for Research in coordination
 with the Ministry of Economy, Development, and Tourism. With the support of the
 Sustainable Productive Development Programme (DPS).




Action 72. Promotion of
specialised technological
development through Green
Hydrogen Technological
Development Centres

 Objective: Strengthen the       capacity to develop and manage green hydrogen

 technological innovation, aimed at generating local technical and economic
 information, transferring knowledge and technology at interinstitutional levels and
 between the national and international ecosystem, in the field of green hydrogen
 and its derivatives, through the implementation of two technological development
 centres:


 •   "Green      Hydrogen   Technological    Development    and    Interinstitutional
     Coordination Centre for the Maritime and Naval Industry", carried out by the
     Chilean Navy for the technological development of the Naval and Maritime
     Industry.


 •   "Magallanes Technological Development Centre." Corresponding to one of the
     prioritised initiatives identified from the work carried out by the Transforma
     Magallanes programme.


 Timeline: 2024-2026




 Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan               page 191
       Milestones:
       •   2025: Launch of the Magallanes Technological Development Centre.


       •   2025: Launch of the Technological Development Centre for the Maritime
            Industry.


       •   2026: Development of a pilot propulsion system powered by synthetic
            fuel, by the Technological Development Centre for the Maritime Industry.


       Responsible Institutions: Chilean Navy, Ministry of Energy, and Ministry
       of Defence. Regional Government of Magallanes and Chilean Antarctica, CORFO,
       and Ministry of Economy, Development, and Tourism, with the support of other
       agencies from the Chilean Government. Both initiatives are supported by the
       Sustainable Productive Development Programme (DPS), and in the case of the
       Magallanes Centre, it is executed by CORFO.




  Action 73. Compilation of
  information on scientific and
  technological equipment and
  infrastructure for conducting
  research, development, and
  innovation in green hydrogen,
  and development of a
  strengthening proposal

       Objective: A study will be developed to strengthen research, development, and
innovation activities related to green hydrogen in Chile, quantifying the R&D needs
necessary to cover the entire value chain of green hydrogen; surveying the scientific and
technological capabilities of the main research centres in Chile that are developing solutions
around this industry, and proposing public policy instruments that promote the




       Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                  page 192
deployment of scientific and technological infrastructure in the country.

Additionally, public policy instruments will be proposed to promote the deployment
of infrastructure and equipment for technical vocational training in the country,
focusing on a network of specialised laboratories in green hydrogen and its
derivatives, adequately equipped for technical training, and providing training and
skills development necessary for the green hydrogen value chain, as well as the
occupational profiles demanded by the industry.


Timeline: 2024-2025
Milestone:
•   2025: Publication of a study on scientific and technological needs,
    capacities, infrastructure, and a plan for the enabling infrastructure
    development.


Responsible Institution:             Ministry of Energy in coordination with the

Ministry of Education, with the support of the Spanish Agency for International
Development Cooperation (AECID).




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                page 193
Action 74. Generate and
disseminate technological
information related to the value
chain of green hydrogen and its
derivatives

  Objective: Provide technological information to facilitate understanding of
  global panoramas and trends regarding technologies related to the value chain of
  green hydrogen and its derivatives. This will enable, among other uses, the
  construction of indicators based on national and international patent data, which
  reflect the capacity and performance status of countries in these development
  fields.


  Timeline: 2023-2025

  Milestone:

  •    2025: Publication of the first version of national and international patent
       indicators on technologies related to the value chain of green hydrogen and
       its derivatives.


  Responsible Institution: National Institute of Industrial Property,
  Ministry of Economy, Development, and Tourism, with the support of the Ministry

  of Energy.




  Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                  page 194
 6.18 OPENING OF
 INTERNATIONAL
 MARKETS

                  In accordance with the ambition set out in the National Green Hydrogen
                 Strategy to make Chile a significant global exporter of green hydrogen
                 and its derivatives, it is necessary to advance actions that position Chile
                 on the global stage as a potential leader in the future global green
                 hydrogen economy.


                  For this purpose, one of the crucial elements is foreign investment, which
                 also contributes to the goals of decarbonisation and diversification of our
                 productive matrix. In this way, Chile can leverage its leadership in the
                 global green hydrogen market to attract investments, offering among its
                 advantages the natural conditions for low-cost hydrogen production and
                 derivatives, and institutional strength and coordination among
                 stakeholders.


                  This task requires a high degree of international collaboration through
                 bilateral and multilateral cooperation with countries and international
                 organisations, dissemination of information to foreign investors about
                 Chile's business ecosystem, and promotion of products and attraction of
                 investments from specialised Chilean institutions.

                  To this end, our country has signed a series of international cooperation
                 instruments aimed at strengthening relations with potential importers of
                 green hydrogen and its derivatives, establishing general principles of
                 action for the parties, sharing experiences, facilitating technical
                 assistance, and exchanging information and knowledge associated with
                 the deployment of green hydrogen value chain technologies and its
                 derivatives.

                  Furthermore, in anticipation of the need to prepare for the massification
                 of green markets globally, it is essential to forge the necessary conditions
                 in the national production ecosystem of green hydrogen




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                        page 195
                  and its derivatives to meet the regulatory and certification requirements
                 established in the main global demand hubs.

                  On the other hand, our country seeks to contribute to the development
                 of a low emissions global maritime trade through green maritime
                 corridors in Chile, positioning it as a link in the sustainable trade of the
                 future.

                  This line of action includes actions and milestones aimed at promoting
                 products and attracting investments, international cooperation, and
                 improving the country's necessary conditions to participate in
                 international green markets.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                        page 196
LINE OF ACTION 18:
OPENING OF INTERNATIONAL MARKETS
                                 ACTIONS


75. Position the country's green hydrogen industry abroad.

76. Attract foreign investment for the green hydrogen and
derivatives industry in Chile.

77. Subscription and implementation of international cooperation
instruments.

78. Promote agreements and/or strategic alliances with governments
and multilateral actors for the development of the hydrogen and
derivatives industry in the country.

79. Develop a strategic proposal for a sustainability certification
system for hydrogen.

80. Strengthen the National Renewable Energy Registry (RENOVA)
of the National Electric Coordinator as the base platform for the
hydrogen certification system.


81. Implement green maritime corridors.



 MILESTONES
           Participate in the two main annual international                  Finalise Chile's participation in regional certification frameworks, such as
           meetings/exhibitions of the sector.                               Certhilac.
           Implement, through ProChile's commercial offices abroad in
           focus markets for the industry, promotion activities to           Publication of the study and roadmap to establish the requirements to meet
           maintain Chile's international positioning.                       international standards of major import hubs.

                                                                             First enablement of the RENOVA platform for the hydrogen certification system.
          Publication of an e-Book on green hydrogen in Chile
           Launch of this Action Plan in English at the                      Launch of certification platform.
           Investment Forum.
                                                                             Publication of the results of feasibility studies for the transportation of
           Development of an annual internationalisation agenda to           copper and sulfuric acid.
           prioritise and strategically plan cooperation activities.
                                                                             Publication of the results of the pre-feasibility study for a green maritime
                                                                             corridor for aquaculture in the Aysén region.

           Identification of ports in Asia to promote strategic alliances.   Materialise the first green maritime commercial route in Latin America by 2030.
                                                                             Note: Bar colours only indicate complementarity of measures.




                             Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                                                   page 197
Action 75. Positioning the
country's green hydrogen
industry abroad

  Objective: Position Chile in the international market by promoting the
  opportunities of hydrogen and its derivatives produced in the country to
  international off-takers, thus contributing to the country's image, market
  intelligence, and commercial management.


  Timeline: 2023-2030

  Annual Milestones:

  •   Participate in the two main annual international meetings/exhibitions of the
      sector to deepen the country's positioning and enhance commercial
      opportunities with international off-takers.


  •   Implement promotional activities through ProChile's commercial offices abroad
      in focus markets for the industry to maintain Chile's international positioning.


  Responsible Institution: ProChile.




  Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                 page 198
Action 76. Attracting foreign
investment for the green
hydrogen and derivatives
industry in Chile


       Objective: Contribute to attracting investment by promoting,             supporting, and
       facilitating its entry into the market, connecting investors' interests with the business
       opportunities that the country offers. This includes developers, manufacturers, and
       other international actors in the value chain. The aim is to attract foreign investment
       and identify new industrial opportunities to create a productive ecosystem in line with
       the goals set out in the National Green Hydrogen Strategy.

       A crucial activity in this action is to convey to various stakeholders, both national and
       foreign, a narrative about the development of the green hydrogen and derivatives
       industry in Chile, emphasising Chile's potential, interministerial coordination (public
       sector), and the role of project developers. In the first half of 2024, the first e-Book on
       green hydrogen will be published to address this need.


       Timeline: Ongoing work 2023-2030

       Milestones:

       •   First half of 2024: Publication of an e-Book on green hydrogen in Chile


       •   First half of 2024: Launch of this Action Plan in English at the Investment
            Forum.


       Responsible Institution: InvestChile.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                           page 199
Action 77. Subscription and
implementation of international
cooperation instruments



       Objective:       Promote technical and diplomatic cooperation with strategic

       countries through instruments such as agreements, Memoranda of Understanding
       (MoUs), joint declarations (JDs), among others, to promote lines of work that foster
       technology development, regulatory harmonisation, as well as international
       certification.


       Timeline: 2023-2030, adapting to the needs of each timeframe within this decade.

       Annual Milestone:

       Development of an annual internationalisation agenda to prioritise and strategically
       plan cooperation activities, enabling the utilisation of available opportunities and the
       opening of new avenues for international cooperation.




       Responsible Institution: Ministry of Energy, with support from the Ministry
       of Foreign Affairs.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                         page 200
Action 78. Promote agreements
and/or strategic partnerships
with governments and
multilateral actors for the
development of the green
hydrogen industry and its
derivatives in the country

       Objective: Foster and implement agreements and/or strategic partnerships with
       governments and multilateral actors that establish actions contributing to enabling
       and enhancing the green hydrogen industry and its derivatives. These actions may
       include the transfer of resources, technology, knowledge, and innovation; incentives
       for import-export markets; regulatory harmonisation; international certification
       schemes, among others.


       Timeline:      2023-2030, adapting to the needs of each time frame within this
       decade.

       Milestone:
       Second half of 2024: Identification of ports in Asia to promote strategic partnerships,
       as a continuation of the work done with European ports.


       Responsible Institution: Ministry of Energy in coordination with relevant
       agencies, as appropriate.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                        page 201
Action 79. Develop a strategic
proposal for establishing a
sustainability certification
system for hydrogen

       Objective:          Develop a strategic proposal for establishing a sustainability

       certification system for hydrogen, ammonia, and other synthetic fuels in Chile. This
       proposal should delve into elements associated with the certification framework to
       ensure compliance with import requirements being discussed in Europe (with a special
       emphasis on Germany), Japan, the Republic of Korea, among others, applied to
       hydrogen, ammonia, and synthetic fuels.

       Additionally, a certification scheme for hydrogen and its derivatives will be promoted,
       under a harmonisation approach, aligned with the characteristics of the Latin
       American and Caribbean region, accommodating the requirements and particularities
       of the countries.


       Timeline: 2024-2025

       Milestones:

       •   2024: Formalise Chile's participation in regional certification schemes,
            such as Certhilac.


       •   2025: Publication of the study and roadmap to establish the requirements
            for meeting international standards of the main import hubs consistent with
            national regulatory context.


       Responsible Institution:                Ministry of Energy and Ministry of the

       Environment, with the support of GIZ, IDB, and other organisations.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                        page 202
Action 80. Strengthen the
National Registry of Renewable
Energies (RENOVA) of the
National Electric Coordinator as
the foundational platform for the
hydrogen certification system

       Objective:         Define the necessary actions to establish a green hydrogen

       sustainability certification system in line with the main international standards. The
       Ministry of Energy will lead this coordinated interinstitutional effort, which involves
       strengthening the National Registry of Renewable Energies (RENOVA) of the National
       Electric Coordinator as the foundational platform for the hydrogen certification
       system.


       From this work, the role of RENOVA in other certification systems (such as Huella
       Chile, Article 30 LMCC - Voluntary certification system for GHG and water) will be
       established, and an official methodology will be developed, along with the publication
       of an administrative act detailing the calculation of the grid emission factor and the
       residual.


       Timeline: 2025-2030

       Milestones:

            •      2025: First activation of the RENOVA platform for the hydrogen
                   certification system.


            •      2026-2030: Launch of the certification platform.


            •      Responsible Institution: Ministry of Energy in strict coordination with the
                   National Electric Coordinator.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                           page 203
Action 81. Implement green
maritime corridors


       Objective: To promote maritime routes where vessels operate using exclusively
       low-emission alternative fuels. This effort, led by the Ministry of Energy with the

       support of the Ministries of Transportation and Telecommunications and Foreign

       Affairs, and in coordination with the private sector, aims to develop relationships

       among all stakeholders in the value chain for cargo movement in frameworks that

       favour the decarbonisation of the maritime sector.

       Currently, the possible green maritime corridors are being analysed, with ammonia
       being one of the options among the low-emission alternative fuels being considered.
       This effort is part of a set of integrated initiatives, including the implementation of
       feasibility studies to identify the most viable routes.


       Timeline: 2023-2030

       Milestones:
       •   End of 2024: Publication of the results of feasibility studies for transporting
           copper and sulfuric acid.

       •   Mid-2025: Publication of the results of the pre-feasibility study for a green
           maritime corridor for aquaculture in the Aysén region.


       •   2030: Materialise the first green commercial maritime route in Latin
           America before 2030.


       Responsible Institution: Ministry of Energy, with support from the
       Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Transportation and
       Telecommunications.




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan                        page 204
       Available for download on the website
       www.planhidrogenoverde.cl

                 A.1 SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS




                 A.2 AUDIENCE ANALYSIS AND PARTICIPATORY WORKSHOPS




                 A.3 SIGNED INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS




                 A.4 STRATEGIC COMMITTEE DOCUMENT




                 A.5 CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN 111 MEASURES OF THE PRELIMINARY
                 AND FINAL VERSIONS OF THE ACTION PLAN




Ministry of Energy – Green Hydrogen Action Plan             page 206

